Chemistry on the Desktop

This month, we will look at another chemistry application. Specifically, we will be looking at BKchem. As opposed to many other chemistry applications, BKchem provides both a nice GUI for constructing molecules and a set chemical analysis tools to look at the properties of the newly constructed molecule. Most distributions should have a package available to make installation easier. For example, Debian-based distributions can install BKchem with the command
   sudo apt-get install bkchem

Once it BKchem is installed, you can start it either from the menu entry or by executing the command 'bkchem' from a terminal window. When it first opens, you will get a blank screen where you can start your chemical construction. [bkchem1.png] If you have a previously created molecule, you can load it by clicking the menu item "File->Load" which will load the data into a new tab, or clicking the menu item "File->Load to the same tab" to load it into the currently active tab. BKchem can also import data from other file formats. If you click the menu item "File->Import" you will see that you can import files with formats CML, CML2 or Molfile. If you want to start by building your own molecule, there are several menus of building blocks available. They are laid out as a pair of rows, just below the menu listings at the top of the window. The top row of icons selects which list of icons will be available in the second row. The first icon in the first row is simply an arrow, allowing you to select objects within your molecule so you can edit their properties. The next icon pulls up the row of drawing elements where you can start to draw your new molecule. You have several choices in terms of line thicknesses, styles and bond angles. You can create a chain of elements by simply clicking on the end of an existing line segment. Once you have the basics of your structure laid out, you will want to edit the details next. To do this, click on the first icon again (captioned with 'edit') and then click on the structure element you want to edit. This is where having a proper mouse is a must, as you need to click with the middle button on your mouse to pull up the edit panel. [bkchem2.png] If you are using a laptop touch panel, you need to click the left and right buttons together and then scroll with the touch pad itself. As an example, if you click on an atom, you can change the atom in this location, or even replace it with some type of atomic group, such as an alcohol group. You can also edit all kinds of display options, such as colours used, fonts for text, text placement and line widths. The third icon on the top icon row pulls up a list of available templates for larger commonly used atomic structures, such as benzene rings. [bkchem3.png] The fourth icon on the top row lets you pull up a list of user created templates that you have created previously. So you can add templates for those substructures that you use most often.

You may need to play with the display in order to be able to see everything clearly while you are working. The appropriate instructions are under the "Object" menu item. The first is the menu item "Object->Scale". Selecting either a portion of your structure or the whole thing, you can essentially zoom in or out to better see the structure as you work on it. [bkchem6.png] You can also do changes to display, such as changing the stack layers or mirroring horizontally or vertically. The last option available is the menu item "Object->Configure". This will pop up another window where you can easily change atom, bond, font or common details for the display. [bkchem7.png] This is also the same window that you get when you click on the "Properties" item on the edit menu you get when click the middle mouse button.

Up to now, we have only been building up our molecule. In the following screenshots, I will be using a simple benzene ring to discuss the chemistry you can do with BKchem. You can get basic information about your structure by clicking on the menu item "Chemistry->Info" will pop up a new window with items such as the chemical formula, molecular weight and composition. [bkchem4.png] If you want to check to see that the structure you have built makes sense, you can select it and click on the menu item "Chemistry->Check chemistry". If everything makes sense, you will get a new window telling you that everything is OK. Otherwise, you will get an error message highlighting what doesn't quite make sense from a chemical point of view. This is where you may need to dig into the grittier items available from the edit menu when you click on an element with the mouse middle button. You may need to change the type of atom, or change its valency. As an example of the type of error you may get, you can see what I got when I changed one of the carbon atoms to an oxygen atom in the benzene ring. [bkchem5.png] At the far right side of the menu bar, there is an entry for available plugins. One of these plugins allows you to calculate bond angles. You can select two connected bonds by holding down the shift key and clicking them one after the other. You can then click the menu item "Plugins->Angle between bonds" to have the angle calculated. [bkchem8.png]

When you have finished all of the work of creating your new molecular structure, you will want to save it off for further analysis or sharing with other researchers. The default file format that structures get saved in is an SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics) file. If you want to save your work using a different file format, you can click on the menu item "File->Export" to get a list of all of the file formats that are supported. Most of them are simply other graphics file formats to save the graphical representation of your molecular structure. There are a few that are specifically used to store chemical information, though. You can select CML or CML2 (Chemical Markup Language) to save more of the chemical information for your structure. You can also save your structure in the molfile file format, which was created by MDL Information Systems to store more detailed information about a chemical structure. If you only want an easily shared image of your molecular structure, you can export it into either a PDF or PNG file.

As you have seen this month, you can use BKchem to simply build molecular structures in a way similar to many other chemistry applications. What is slightly different with BKchem is that you can do some basic chemistry with your newly created structure directly from BKchem. This added functionality might be enough to make BKchem a tool to add to your arsenal.



IMAGES
bkchem1.png  -  When you first start up BKchem, you get a blank canvas to start building your molecule.
bkchem2.png  -  You can edit an element by clicking the middle mouse button. The menu you get depends on the type of element you are editing.
bkchem3.png  -  You can add larger commonly used structures with templates.
bkchem4.png  -  You can get a list of basic chemical information about your structure.
bkchem5.png  -  Sometimes, the chemistry doesn't work out.
bkchem6.png  -  You can scale parts of your molecular structure to make it easier to work on.
bkchem7.png  -  A configuration window allows you to easily edit properties of your structure's elements.
bkchem8.png  -  You can calculate bond angles for your molecule.
