Gabedit - The portal to chemistry


There are a lot of chemistry software applications available out there to do scientific work on Linux. We have covered several here in previous issues of the magazine. All of them have there own peculiar specialties; areas where one may work better than another. Depending on what your research entails, you may need to use multiple software packages to handle all of the work. This is where gabedit steps in to help you out. Gabedit provides a single unified interface to a multitude of chemistry packages available on your system. It should be available within the package management systems for most distributions. For example, on Debian-based systems, you can install it with the command
   sudo apt-get install gabedit
Once it is installed, you can start it up with the command 'gabedit'. [gabedit1.png] The very first time you start gabedit up, you get presented with a series of windows where you are told about all of the data directories that need to be created in order for gabedit to run. The pane on the left-hand side shows a listing of all of the chemistry programs that you could use within you work. The central pane provides two tabs, one for input and one for results.

To start working with gabedit, you need to create a new input file for the software package that you want to work with. The icon bar across the top of the window provide buttons for the various types of input files that gabedit can work with. Clicking on one of them will pop up a new window where you can enter parameters relevant for that type of input file. For example, clicking on the first button pops up a window where you can create a new input file for GAMESS. [gabedit2.png] If you try and do this at the beginning of your work, you will actually get an error. All of these programs depend on some set of atoms, defined as a geometry, in order to do their calculations. This means that you will need to create this geometry first. Clicking on the menu entry 'Geometry' will give you a list of different options for creating a new geometry. The first two are specialized options for Gaussian and Molpro. In this case, we will use the two options at the bottom of the list. The first option pops up a new window where you can select the type of geometry (XYZ, for example) and then create a table of atoms used within your geometry. [gabedit3.png] Right-clicking inside the table of the geometry editor gives you a pop-up menu where you can add a new entry to the table. This allows you to select the element, location and charge for the new point in the geometry. [gabedit4.png] This geometry exists within the memory space of the current project. This means that it will be available for other functions within gabedit. The other geometry function that is available is the draw function. You can access it by using the menu item 'Geometry->Draw'. This pops up a new window where you can visualize your molecule and manipulate it before doing any calculations. [gabedit5.png] Here, you can edit the existing geometry and move elements around. Or, you can add or remove elements to the molecule. You can even add entire functional units, such as benzene rings or alcohol groups.

Once you have an input file, you need to run it through the appropriate software package in order to get results. If the programs you wish to use are installed on your local machine and are in your search path, it should just work out of the box. If they were installed in some other location, you need to tell gabedit where they are. Clicking on the menu item 'Settings->Preferences' will bring up a new window where you can set the commands needed to run the relevant programs. [gabedit6.png] You can then run the program by either clicking the run button in the icon bar or clicking the menu item 'Run->Run a Computation Chemistry program'. This will present a new window where you can set the parameters for this run. [gabedit7.png] For a local run, you can set parameters such as which program to use, what folder to run in and the filenames and commands to execute. If you select 'Remote host' instead, you can select the protocol to communicate over and which host to communicate with. You can also set the username and password to use, along with the working directory on the remote machine. If you find that your initial choice of program isn't optimal, you can try another. By clicking the menu item 'Tools->Open Babel', you get a window that allows you to do a translation of input file from one file format to another. This way, you can reuse your previous work within a different software package.

Gabedit is not only useful in setting up a computational chemistry problem and run it, but it is also useful in analyzing the results afterwards. The analysis functions are available under the 'Tools' menu item. You can select to load a file for a basic XY-plot. You can select the menu item 'Tools->XY plotter' to bring up the plot window. Right clicking the plot window brings up a menu where you can change the options of the plot, as well as load data files to be plotted. There is also an option to do contour plots by clicking on the menu item 'Tools->Contours plotter'. [gabedit8.png] There is also a whole series of spectrum analyses that you can apply, too. You can do IR, Rahman, UV, and ECD spectral analysis. For each of these options in the 'Tools' menu, you can load an output file from a number of different file formats, including a special gabedit file format. Under the 'NMR spectrum' entry of the 'Tools' menu, you can either select to load a previously calculated results file, or you can select the 'NMR Spin-Spin Splitting Simulation'. [gabedit9.png] You can set several options, such as the lineshape and the scaling. If you right-click the plot window, you have the same options as in the other plot windows. You can add more data sets, change the plot details or the overall colour theme.

With gabedit, you can use quite a few of the available chemistry packages from a unified user interface. When doing more complicated research, or doing discovery type work, being able to use multiple packages will definitely make the work easier to handle. Hopefully, gabedit can help move your research into new areas. You can also expand the options within gabedit by adding your own functional units or altering the molecular mechanics parameters to be used in your work.




IMAGES
gabedit1.png  -  When you first start up gabedit, you get an empty project that you can begin your work within.
gabedit2.png  -  When you create a new input file, a new window pops up where you can enter the initial parameters.
gabedit3.png  -  You need to create a new geometry that will be used in the calculations.
gabedit4.png  -  You can add individual elements, setting their chemical properties, to your geometry.
gabedit5.png  -  You can use the draw functionality to visualize the geometry of your collection of atoms.
gabedit6.png  -  You can set the specific commands for each of the available chemistry packages.
gabedit7.png  -  You can set the parameters for either a local run or a remote run within the same window.
gabedit8.png  -  You can do contour plots of the results from a computation.
gabedit9.png  -  You can do NMR spectrum simulations for your molecule of choice.
