Basic Chemistry on the Gnome Desktop

I have realized that I have missed out on a huge area of computational science, chemistry. There are lots of packages out there to do chemistry on your desktop. This month, we'll take a look at a general tool called avogadro. It can do computations of energy and gradient values, it can do analysis of molecular systems, interface to GAMESS and import and export from and to several file formats. There are also lots of options in order to generate really pretty pictures of your totally new molecule that you hope will revolutionize the chemical industry.

When you first start up avogadro, it will open up a new project consisting of one tab for a view of the molecule. Within this window, you can create a molecule in several different ways. If you want to, you can build up your molecule step by step, one atom at a time. You can click on the pencil at the top or press F8 to select the draw tool. With this, you can click and drag to draw atoms and bonds. To select different elements, or different bond types, you will want to click on the 'Tool Settings...' button to get a second panel with those options available. To draw, you click with the left mouse button. To erase, you click with the right mouse button. You also have the option of building it up from molecule fragments. Under the 'Build' menu item, you can select 'Insert->Fragment...'. This pops up a window where you can select from among molecule fragments like carboxylic acids, ketones, alkanes, or amino acids. You can even build a buckminsterfullerene with a single click. As you build up the molecule, it will appear in the view window. You can also insert a fragment by entering a SMILES text string. SMILES is the Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry Specification. You can check out the entry on Wikipedia for more details on its format. There is also a peptide builder under the menu entry 'Build->Insert->Peptide...'. This dialog window lets you build up a peptide by selecting the amino acids, selecting the terminating fragments and selecting the structure of the peptide. The available structures are straight chain, alpha helix and beta sheet. You can make global adjustments to your molecule by adjusting the hydrogen bonds. You can do a global replacement of changing hydrogens to methyl groups. You can also change the number of hydrogen atoms based on the pH of the molecule. You can save this molecule in several different formats, including CML, GAMESS Input, Gaussian Input, MDL SDfile, PDB, NWChem Input, Sybyl Mol2 and XYZ.

Once you are done building up your molecule, one of the first things you may want to do is get an idea of what it actually looks like. As a first approximation, you can use the function 'Optimize Geometry', located under the menu item 'Extensions'. This will actually go through your molecule, adjusting the bond lengths and the bond angles to optimize the physical geometry of your molecule. You can select what force field is used to do this calculation. Under the menu item 'Extensions->Molecular Mechanics->Setup Force Field', a new window will pop up letting you which force field you want to use, along with the number of steps to take, the algorithm to use (either Steepest Descent or Conjugate Gradients) and the convergence threshold. Depending on the complexity of your molecule, some settings may work better than others. For example, the MMFF94(s) field is good for organic chemistry and drug-like molecules. If you try and optimize the geometry and you get odd looking results, checking these options should be your first step. You can see the progress of the calculation by clicking on the 'Messages' tab at the bottom of the window. Once you have optimized your geometry, you can calculate the energy of your molecule by selecting 'Extensions->Molecular Dynamics->Calculate Energy'.

There is a limited amount that you can do directly in avogadro in terms of doing actual quantum level calculations. But that is OK, since there are lots of really good programs that already do that job very well. You can use avogadro to output files that can be used by these other programs as input files to do these higher level computations. Under the 'Extension' menu item you will find entries to build input files for GAMESS, Gaussian, MOLPRO, MOPAC, NWChem, and Q-Chem. Each of these entries pops open a new dialog window where you can select the extra options for the to be created input file. This would include things like the number of processors to use, the type of calculation to do, or the theory to use, for example. There is a preview window that shows you what this export file will look like. This way you can be sure you're getting what you were expecting. Once you are happy, you can click on the generate button at the bottom of the window to generate the input file for the external program of interest. 

Once these calculations are done, you can import them back into avogadro to do some analysis. You can import trajectory files, or vibration files. Once that data is imported, there are functions available to graph this data in order to extract information and see what is happening. For files that contain molecular vibration information, you can even graph the results out as a movie. You have some options in terms of the frame rate, etc., and once you are happy you can save it as an AVI file. You can also import data from experiments, too. When studying chemicals, one experiment that gets done is to look at the spectra of the chemical of interest. To start, you need to click on the menu item 'Extensions->Spectra...'. This pops open a new window to do the analysis in. At the bottom of the screen, you can click on 'Load Data...'. This lets you import data in two formats, either PWscf IR data or Turbomole IR data. You can select how this data is displayed, including producing publication quality graphics of your data.

Hopefully this short introduction gives you some ideas to get you started. There are also lots of other chemistry programs around that you can look at to offer more functions and calculations. Now you're ready to go out and do some quantum chemistry.
