Science on Android

We have looked at a lot of different scientific packages that are available under Linux. But, the focus has been on Linux running on desktop machines. This has been rather short-sighted, however. There are lots of other platforms that have Linux available and we should not be neglecting them. This month, we will start looking at the type of science you can do on the Android platform. Over the next several months I will include the occasional Android application that you may find useful in order to do science while you are out and about. The first application we will look at is Maxima for Android. A long time ago, we looked at using Maxima on the desktop, so you can always go back and look it up in order to do a quick review. Maxima has been under development since the 1960's at MIT, and continues to this day under an open source license. It is a full computer algebra system, written in Common Lisp. Luckily, Embeddable Common Lisp has been ported to Android, so this gives us the Lisp engine that is needed to run the Maxima engine. Installation of Maxima on your Android device is a two step process. The first step is to install the base application from the Google Play Store. Once it is installed and you run it for the first time, the application will unpack the bulk of the application. Because this section is so large, the app will ask you where to unpack it to. This way, you can put it on some other media if you don't have a lot of room on the internal storage.

When you first start up Maxima, you get a display of the licensing information and the version number, and then are presented with an input prompt labeled as "(%i1)". [startup.png] Depending on the device you are using, and the age of your eyes, you may have a hard time seeing the output displayed on the screen. If so, you can zoom in and out by using a two finger pinch or zoom, just like in other Android applications. Your other option is to actually change the font size being used. You can use the command "textSize:XX", where XX is the size you wish to use for the font in pixels. The suggested range to use is from 10 to 50 pixels. At the bottom of the screen, you will find a text entry box that is outlined in orange. This is where you enter the Maxima commands that you want to run. Once you have entered your command and hit enter, it gets displayed in the main window, along with the results. The pretty-print display of this mathematical information is handled by the MathJax library. The history mechanism used in order to re-use previous commands is very intuitive. When you tap on a previous command, it is copy and pasted into the text input command box, ready for you to make any necessary edits before executing it again.

The Android version of Maxima includes a full set of documentation that is available by tapping on the menu icon and selecting the "Manual" option. There are a lot of examples available in each section of the manual that you may want to try out. Assuming that this would be a common thing people would want to do, you can simply tap the example you want to work with. This will copy the example into the command text input box. This way, you can find an example that is close to what you want to try and do and easily copy it into the command box. You can then edit it and make any required changes before running it. This can greatly speed up any research work you are trying to do with Maxima. There is also a function named "example()" available. If you call "example" without any parameters, it will generate a list of all of the subjects that have examples provided. You can then look at the examples for a specific subject by calling example with the named subject. For example, you can learn about arrays with the command "example(arrays)".  This will pull up and run a series of examples on how to use arrays within Maxima. The other useful function for speeding up research is the ability to load files of Maxima commands. Maxima for Android automatically looks in the main Download directory when you try and load files. Also, files with ".txt" file name ending are found and loaded without having to include the file ending. All of this means that if you have a file named "my_script.txt" in the Download directory, you can load it with the command "load(my_script)". If you use Dropbox and synchronize the Download directory, you can easily move files back and forth between your Android device and your desktop.

One major area that is not completely implemented yet is the graphical system for plots and graphs. However, new features are being added with each new version. The graphical functions are actually provided by gnuplot. The functions that are currently implemented are plot2d, plot3d, implicit_plot, contour_plot, draw, draw2d, and draw3d. These commands pop open a new window to display the results of the plot command. Since everything is full screen on an Android, you need to tap on the back icon to get back to the main Maxima window. If you want to see the plot again, you can tap on the menu and select the "Graph" option. This will reopen the last plotting window. Another major issue is the lapack library. Trying to load it will cause an error. So you won't have access to the optimized linear algebra functions provided through lapack.

When you are doing complicated research, you may need to stop part way through the process and pick it up again at a later time. This is handled by the concept of a session. Tapping the menu icon, you can select the "Session" option. This will pop open a sub-menu where you can choose to either "Save", "Restore" or "Playback" your session. You only have one saved session state at a time, however, so it is really only useful when you need to stop in the middle of a workflow. If you are working on a larger project, where you are working with the same libraries for an extended period of time, you can set initialization code that gets run whenever Maxima starts. This code needs to be stored in the file "/data/local/tmp/maxima-init.mac". Any arbitrary Maxima code can be placed here, so you can initialize a pretty complicated environment if you wish.

You can now carry Maxima around in your pocket, ready to work out all of those troublesome problems that come up in everyday life. You won't have any excuse for not solving the equations you need to in order to plot out your space travel, all on the train ride to work. Just promise to be good, and don't try to use it on your next physics exam.


Images
startup.png - When you start Maxima, you get the standard license and version information.

URLs
https://sites.google.com/site/maximaonandroid/ - Home page for Maxima
