Designing your own Rocket

A lot of the software packages we've looked at over the past months have been focused strictly on doing computations on your machine, separated from the real world. This month, we'll look at using your computer to design something that you can then go and build and use in the real world, your own model rocket. We'll take a look at the utility OpenRocket, and see how it can help us design our own rockets. It can even run simulations on the designs to see how they should behave in flight. Most distributions should include a package for OpenRocket. For example, in Ubuntu, you would install it with 'apt-get install openrocket'. It is actually a Java program, so you can always download the jar file directly for the home web site (http://openrocket.sourceforge.net). To run it, you will need to have a reasonably up to date Java VM installed as well.

When you first start up, you are presented with an empty screen, ready to start designing your first rocket. A project window pops up, allowing you to enter details like the design name, your name and designnotes. You can build up your rocket from a series of components. You will probably want to start with the nose cone by clicking on it from the "Add new component" window. It will then appear in the bottom section, beginning your design. You will see that OpenRocket already begins to make calculations based on your design. You will see a small blue circle that denotes the center of gravity of your rocket. The center of gravity is the point through which all of the mass acts. There is also a small red dot that marks the center of pressure. This is the point through which all of the atmospheric forces act. OpenRocket calculates these values as you make changes to your design. Almost all of the parameters for each component can be edited. There are two ways to edit these component parameters. You can double click on the component of interest in the design window to pop up the edit window. There is also a list of the component layers in the top half. You can highlight the component of interest here, and then click on the "Edit" button. What you can change will depend on which component you are trying to edit. The first component to design is probably the nose cone. You can select what kind of profile your nose cone should have, such as conical or ellipsoid. You can set the length and base diameter, as well as the wall thickness. But OpenRocket goes even further. You can select what kind of material your nose cone should be made from. The different types of materials have different densities. This changes the weight of your component. There are several materials presets available, but you can also go ahead and define your own custom material type. This custom material can either be used just for one design, or you can add it permanently to your materials database if it is something that you will be using it over and over again. You can even set the type of finish that your rocket will have. This finish can be different for each component, or you can apply a common finish to your entire rocket.

The next part of your rocket is the actual body tube. If your rocket is going to have a single stage, you will only need a single body tube. For multiple stages, you will need a separate body tube for each stage. Opening the edit window for the body tube allows you to change the tube length, the diameter and the wall thickness. You can also change the material that the body tube is made from. Since body tubes usually contain a rocket motor, you can also set the motor that you wish to use. To do so, you will want to open the edit window and click on the motor tab. You can click the "Select Motor" button and pick from a large selection of commercially available motors. This list of motors includes technical information, like the thrust curve and the run times, as well as physical characteristics like the length, diameter and weight. As in the other sections of the application, you can define your own custom entries. This means that even full on DIY model rocket enthusiasts who build their own motors can use OpenRocket to design their rockets. The component list includes other items like parachutes, shock cords, connectors and blocks. This means that you can design your rocket as a complete model. The final stage is to add tail fins to your rocket. As with the other components, there are well designed presets availble that will satisfy most design needs. You can edit some parameters to customize the fins to some degree. If this is not enough, there is a freehand option where you can design your fins from scratch.

OpenRocket is not only a design program. You can also take your model rocket and run an analysis on it to see how it will behave in flight. The analysis section will look at individual components and see how they affect the stability, drag and roll characteristics of your rocket. You can set parameters like wind direction, angle of attack and speed, and calculate how it will behave in flight. This is great functionality, but OpenRocket goes even further. It can take your original design and try to optimize it for the best flight characteristics. You can optimize based on altitude, velocity or some other combination of characteristics. Once you have a final design, you can run it through simulations. The simulator can apply different conditions on your rocket, like applying crosswinds or taking into account coriolis effects, and see how your model rocket should behave. OpenRocket uses JFreeChart to plot your rocket's behaviour based on the simulation results. You can even add in your code to the simulation to add extra effects. One way to do this is to use Python and jPype to use Python code in the simulations. There is also the ability to write and use your own expressions in the simulator. This allows you to customize the simulator to a great degree without having to add external code. You can then see the limits of what your model should be able to handle, and how high it will go under different conditions. This is really great in helping you decide when the weather is going to be too rough for your design.

I have only covered the features available in the coarsest way. If you are into building and flying model rockets, your time will definitely be well spent poking around in all of the features available in OpenRocket. There is a forum available, hosted by "The Rocketry Forum", where you can ask for further help. And once you have gained some experience, you can give back by helping other new rocket enthusiasts. Go out and design your fleet and get yourself out into the wild frontier of space.


Images
rocket1.png - When first starting OpenRocket, you get a new project dialog where you can enter details of your rocket.
rocket2.png - You can edit many details of the different components by double-clicking the component of interest.
rocket3.png - The rocket engine database has lots of information on many different brands.
rocket4.png - You can run an analysis on the different components of your rocket.
rocket5.png - You can optimize your rocket to maximize certain parameters.
rocket6.png - You can run full simulations to see how your rocket will behave in different conditions.
