Analyzing Videos for Fun and Profit

A source of scientific data logging that almost everyone carries around with them is their phone and all of the various sensors that may be built into them. While the selection of sensors varies from phone to phone, they almost all have a camera built into them. This month, we will take a look at a piece of software, called tracker, that can be used to analyze videos that you take of experiments. Tracker can be downloaded directly from the project page, located at 'http://physlets.org/tracker/'. There is quite a lot of good documentation available at the main website, including examples of how you might be able to use it from the community of other users. Tracker is written in Java, however, so you will also need to have a JVM installed on your system before you can use it. For example, on a Debian based system, you can install a very good JVM with the command
   sudo apt-get install openjdk-8-jre
You can then download the relevant installer for your system and run it from a terminal window. You probably will need to make the installer executable with a command like
   chmod +x Tracker-4.95-linux-64bit-installer.run
Don't forget to use the sudo command so that you have the correct permissions to do the installation.

Once it is installed, you should have a new entry in your applications menu system. Starting tracker up will give you a new empty project that you can start your video analysis with. [tracker1.png] While you could start analyzing your own videos immediately, you may want to work with simpler video that you can use while learning how tracker works. When you ran the initial installer for tracker, it should have asked you whether you wanted to also install example files. Assuming you said yes, you can now load one of those within tracker. When you click on the menu item 'File->Open File...', you will get a new window where you can select either a movie file or a tracker file. [tracker2.png] To begin with, we will look at loading one of the tracker files from the 'experiments' folder. In the image below, we have loaded the experiment file named 'BallToss.trk'. [tracker3.png] The main window displays the movie that is being analyzed as part of the experiment. The pane in the bottom right-hand side shows a table of x and y coordinates for a series of time units. A similar table is generated for each tracked object within the movie. In this example experiment, the only tracked object is the ball. The top right-hand pane contains the associated plot for the data stored in the table. This way, you can have a visual representation of the tracked motion. We have seen in other articles just how good humans are at seeing patterns in plots of data.

So, what can tracker actually track? At the bottom of the movie display are a set of controls. If you click on the green arrow, the movie will start to play. As it does, tracker actually registers the movement of the tracked object and also updates the data panes on the right-hand side. [tracker4.png] While these panes do give you lots of raw data, there really isn't any analysis being done yet. Clicking the menu item 'View->Data Tool' pops open a new window where you can use this raw data to figure out what is happening in the video. [tracker5.png] The 'Measure' and 'Analyze' buttons at the top of the plot window give you a set of different sections that you could display. This gives you several different analysis options for your data. Clicking on the 'Measure' button gives you the options 'Coordinates', 'Slope' and 'Area'. When you select one or more of these options, you will now get values displayed at the bottom of the plot representing each of the selected values. When you click on the 'Analyze' button, you get a dropdown with the options 'Statistics', 'Curve Fits' and 'Fourier Spectrum'. Each of these options actually opens a new pane in the Data Tool window. The exception is the 'Fourier Spectrum' option. This option actually opens a new window where a Fourier analysis is done on the raw data from the tracked object. [tracker6.png] The 'Statistics' option gives the data displayed in the top right pane. This is the set of descriptive statistics, i.e. the maximum, minimum, mean ans standard deviation, among other values. Selecting the 'Curve Fits' option gives you the pane at the bottom of the plot window. Here, you can select what type of curve is being fitted to your raw data. There are a number of default functions that can be used to try and fit your data. In this case, the linear function is the obvious choice for a fitting function. You can see the function being used, 'x=A*t+B' in this case, along with the calculated values for the parameters A and B. If you are tracking an object that has a really odd motion, you can click the 'Fit Builder' button to pop up a new window where you define a new fitting function. [tracker7.png]

What do you do as part of a new project? Let's say we want to analyze the pendulum video from the sample video folder. You can set some calibration items within the video by either selecting the relevant buttons at the top of the window, or selecting the items under the menu entry 'Track->New->Calibration Tools'. You setup items like a calibration stick, or a reference set of axes. [tracker8.png] One way to do the analysis is to step through the video, frame by frame, selecting the object to be tracked within each frame. This may be the only way to collect the raw data, but humans are lazy. If the object being tracked is relatively consistent across the duration of the video clip in question, you can try using the autotracker. Clicking the autotracker button will pop up a new window where you can control what is being tracked. [tracker9.png] Helpfully, tracker displays reminder information on how to actually use the software. In this case, it reminds you that you need to press control, shift and left-click the mouse button on the object of interest. If you then click on the search button within the autotracker window, it will move through each frame, looking for the object in question. Once it is done, you should have a full set of data from the tracked object. [tracker10.png] From the plot, we see right away that the pendulum follows the expected motion. You can also track multiple objects by creating a new track for each object.

Now that we have taken a quick look at tracker and the kind of analysis you can do with it, you should feel comfortable to start playing and experimenting. Don't forget to share any interesting ideas you come up with on the community page, adding to a great resource for citizen science.



IMAGES
tracker1.png  -  When you start tracker, you get a new empty project ready for you to begin your work.
tracker2.png  -  The open file dialog box allows you to open movie files or tracker files.
tracker3.png  -  Loading a tracker file opens all of the parts of a previous analysis.
tracker4.png  -  As the movie progresses, tracker updates the data panes on the right-hand side for the tracked object.
tracker5.png  -  The Data Tool window provides a set of analysis tools to look at the raw data pulled from the video.
tracker6.png  -  Tracker can also do a Fourier analysis of the observed motion.
tracker7.png  -  You define your own fitting functions as part of the data analysis.
tracker8.png  -  You can setup calibration tools within your video to be analyzed.
tracker9.png  -  The autotracker tries to automatically follow an object from frame to frame.
tracker10.png  -  The autotracker can generate all of your raw data automatically.
