Atomic Modelling with GAMGI


This month, we are going to move back into the realm of chemistry software. In this case, we will look at the General Atomistic Modelling Graphic Interface, or GAMGI. GAMGI provides a very complete set of tools to be able to design and visualize fairly complex molecules. One special ability is that GAMGI has functionality to make creating repeating structures much easier. This is handy when you are trying to create crystalline structures. It should be available in the package repositories of most Linux distributions. For example, in Debian-based ones, you can install GAMGI with the following command.
   sudo apt-get install gamgi
There are also data and documentation packages, named 'gamgi-data' and 'gamgi-doc'. Especially when you first start out, it would be a good idea to install these packages, too.

Once the packages are installed, you can start GAMGI either from the command line or from your desktop environment's menu system. When it starts up, you get a blank canvas to begin your work. [gamgi1.png] This interface is probably one of the more minimal ones of the chemistry packages that you are likely to work with. But this hides all of the functionality that is present within GAMGI. It is object oriented, in that all of the main elements are treated as independent objects, with properties and relationships to other objects. These elements include atoms, bonds, molecules and crystal planes. Each of them are built up of a number of the earlier ones. One extra piece that GAMGI has is the ability to work with orbitals. We'll walk through an example of a salt crystal (NaCl) to see how you can use GAMGI to do graphical analysis.

Since we are looking at a crystalline structure, you will want to start by creating a cell in the window. You do this by clicking on the menu item "Cell->Create". You will then get a pop up window where you can set several properties of the new cell. Since salt is a cubic crystal, you will want to set the system value to "c", for cubic. The lattice value should be set to "F", for face-centered. For each of these, you can get a full set of allowed values by clicking on the associated "List" button. The last value we need here is "5.660", for the a value. Clicking on "Ok" will create the cell. [gamgi3.png] The next step is to start populating it with atoms. You will need to click on the menu item "Atom->Create". This will pop up a new window where you can set all of the properties of the new atom. [gamgi4.png] Clicking the "Table" button will pop up a periodic table where you can select an element. This will populate all of the known values to give you a starting point. Selecting the "View" tab of the pop up window, you should change the style to solid, the size to 1.0 and the variancy to 1.0. Clicking on the "Property" tab, you will also need to change the size value. This is because the sodium atom is ionized, so it is physically a different size. Once everything is set correctly, you can click in the window to create your sodium atom. You can repeat this process to create the chlorine atom. You'll also need to change the radius to 1.810, since the chlorine atom is also ionized. You need to link these atoms to the crystal cell so that GAMGI knows how to layout the given atoms. Clicking the menu item "Cell->Link" pops up a window where you can link in the atoms associated to this cell. [gamgi5.png] In this case, you will want to change the linking method to crystal. You then need to click on the cell, and then the sodium atom. The relevant fields in the pop window will become populated with associated values. You can now tell GAMGI where these sodium atoms are supposed to be by clicking on the "Position" tab and changing the X value to be 0.5. When you click on "OK", GAMGI will populate the crystal cell with the required sodium atoms. Next, you will repeat this process for the chlorine atoms, except that the position is left as 0.0 for all three coordinates.

At this point, the displayed crystal structure is not very clear. You need to add a light source so that GAMGI can do a proper rendering of the crystal. Clicking the menu item "Light->Create" pops up a window where you can define what kind of light source you want to use in the rendering process. [gamgi6.png] Now that you have your crystal finished, you can do some analysis work on it. Clicking the menu item "Atom->Measure" pops up a new window where you can get GAMGI to do some calculations based on the resultant structure. [gamgi7.png] With the window open, you can click on two atoms and get the distance between them. Clicking on the "Angle" tab lets you click on three atoms and get the angle between them. In this case, the distance between neighbouring sodium and chlorine atoms is 2.8300, while the angle formed at the corners of the crystal is 90.00 degrees.

There are also other options available. For example, if you click on the menu item "Molecule->Create", you get a window where you can create entire molecules. [gamgi8.png] In this case, we will go ahead and create a graphene cage. [gamgi9.png] You get a ball of carbon atoms. You can see the properties of this ball by clicking on the menu item "Molecule->Measure". Once the window pops up, you can click on the molecule and get a list of all of the bonds, angles and torsions. You can then move on and also modify the individual atoms. Clicking on the menu item "Atom->Modify" pops up a window. If you then click on an atom, you can then modify it to something else, such as silicon. This changes the relevant bonds in that area, so it changes the entire geometry. Now, when you open up the molecule measures window, it will reflect these changes.

Hopefully, this will give you a taste of what can be done with GAMGI. One of the more unique features is that it actually does the angle and distance calculations based on the ionic state of the atoms involved. In this sense, it is a more scientifically based chemistry imaging program.



IMAGES
gamgi1.png  -  When you start GAMGI up, you get a minimal set of tools to begin your project with.
gamgi2.png  -  When you create a new cell, for crystal structures, you are able to set several different properties on how it will be constructed.
gamgi3.png  -  Creating a new cell will draw the specified structure in the main window.
gamgi4.png  -  You can select which element your atom should be, along with several other properties.
gamgi5.png  -  For crystalline structures, you need to link the related atoms to the cell to show their relationships.
gamgi6.png  -  To do a proper rendering of your molecular structure, you will need to set up one or more light sources.
gamgi7.png  -  You can get measurements of the molecule you created, such as bond lengths and angles.
gamgi8.png  -  You can create more complicated molecules, such as graphene.
gamgi9.png  -  More complex molecules are displayed as a wire-frame, by default.



URLs
http://www.gamgi.org/  -  Main project website
