Linux for Astronomers

In the past, we have looked at specialty distributions that were created for engineers and biologists. But these aren't the only scientific disciplines that have their own distributions. This month, we will look at a distribution created specifically for astronomers, called Distro Astro. This distribution bundles together astronomy software to help users with tasks like running observatories or planetariums, doing professional research, or doing outreach. From the very first moment of booting up Distro Astro, you will notice that this distribution is aimed at astronomers. [distroastro1.png] The look and feel of items from the boot splash screen, to wallpapers and screensavers, have all been given an astronomical theme. The default wallpaper is a slideshow of Hubble images. [distroastro2.png] There is also a unique feature available, called 'Nightvision Mode', that lets you switch the color theme to red based colors to help maintain your night vision when using the computer during observations. [distroastro3.png] We will take a look at some of the tools that are packaged up in Distro Astro to help you in all of your astronomy needs.

The advantage of having a domain specific distribution is that all of the software that you will likely use are bundled together and installed. In Distro Astro, you have the INDI library pre-installed for you. This library is the main interface that is used in telescope control. With it, you can control telescopes from Meade, Celestron, and Orion, among others. It can even control commercial domes, such as those from Sirius Observatories. To be able to make your observations, you need a front-end to talk to your hardware. This access is provided through clients like KStars, XEphem and Cartes du Ciel. After aiming your telescope, you need to actually collect some images, or do some astrophotography. While you can do some with software like KStars, you have software specifically designed to do image capture. Some, like wxAstroCapture, are specifically written for use in astronomy. [distroastro4.png] With it, you can set up automatic guiding and batch image collection. You can then go have a nice hot cup of coffee while your telescope collects your data. To help you keep track of all of these observations, you can use the Observation Manager, a logging program to maintain your records.

Once you have made your observations, you need to process them and do some science with them. The first step is to do some image processing. This might be some filtering or some sort of feature identification routines. One task that is often done is image stacking, so much so that Distro Astro includes the package RegiStax. [distroastro5.png] With it, you can set alignment points and do image analysis on full stacks of images. You can even set up batch processes and run on multiple CPUs, if you have them. You can do more complex image analysis with tools provided by IRAF (Image Reduction and Analysis Facility). Sometimes, the functions already available aren't enough, especially when you are doing leading edge research. In those cases, you are forced to write your own algorithms to do this work. ImageJ is a very popular choice that is available in Distro Astro. With it, you can develop and write your own algorithms in Java.

Unfortunately, the weather doesn't always allow for observations. So, what can you do if you have been stuck away from the telescope for days on end? Distro Astro includes a number of sky chart programs to allow you to plan out your future observations. They are also really useful for budding astronomers. You can use packages like 'Cartes du Ciel' to learn about the sky above your head. [distroastro6.png] You have several other options, including Stellarium and Celestia. If you are more interested in deep sky objects, there is a package called 'Where is M13?'. [distroastro7.png] This package shows objects from several catalogs, such as the Messier, Caldwell, Collinder or NGC catalogs. The unique feature of this software is that it can locate these deep sky objects in 3 dimensions. That way, you can start to get a feel for where in space these objects actually are.

Part of science is outreach, sharing your findings with others and inspiring them. 

With Distro Astro, you can now easily setup that observatory computer or configure a machine to do your research runs on. And, with a live CD option available, you have no excuse keeping you from downloading an ISO and giving it a try. And with all of the packages included, you should be able to burn a CD and run with nothing else to install.


URL
http://www.distroastro.org  -  Main website for Distro Astro


IMAGES
distroastro1.png  -  Even the boot splashscreen has an astronomy theme.
distroastro2.png  -  Once you boot up, you have desktop shortcuts pointing to a series of different tasks.
distroastro3.png  -  For night observations, you can turn on 'Nightvision Mode'
distroastro4.png  -  You can do image capture from your telescope with wxAstroCapture.
distroastro5.png  -  With RegiStax, you can do image processing on full stacks of images.
distroastro6.png  -  With Carte du Ciel, you can learn more about the sky.
distroastro7.png  -  Where is M13 lets you see where deep sky objects are located around you in 3 dimensions.
