Evolving your own life


A majority of the software that we have looked at over the years in this column have been focused on engineering, chemistry or physics. There is a growing number of software packages that are being written to apply computational resources to the problems in biology. This month, we will look at one particular package named biogenesis. Biogenesis provides a platform where you can create entire ecosystems of lifeforms and see how they interact and how the system as a whole evolves over time. You can always get the latest version from the project's main website, but it should also be available in the package management systems for most distributions. For Debian-based distributions, you can install biogenesis with the following command.
   sudo apt-get install biogenesis
If you do download it directly from the project website, you will also need to have a Java virtual machine installed in order to run it. To start it, you can either find the appropriate entry in the menu of your desktop environment or you can simply type in 'biogenesis' from a terminal window. [biogenesis1.png] When it first starts up, you will get an empty window to start your world within.

The first step is to create a world to work in. If you have a previous instance that you want to continue with, you can click on the menu item "Game->Open..." and select the appropriate file. If you want to start fresh, you can click on the menu item "Game->New" to get a new world with a random selection of organisms. [biogenesis2.png] The world starts right away, with organisms moving and potentially interacting immediately. However, you can pause the world by clicking on the icon in the toolbar, second from the right. Alternatively, you can also jut hit the key 'p' to pause and resume the evolution of the world. At the bottom of the window, you will find details about the world as it currently exists. There is a display of the frames per second, along with the current time within the world. Next, there is a count of the current population of organisms. And lastly, there is a display of the current levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide. You can adjust the amount of carbon dioxide within the world by either clicking the relevant icon in the toolbar, or selecting the 'World' menu item and then clicking either 'Increase CO2' or 'Decrease CO2'. There are also a number of parameters which govern how the world works and how your organisms will fair. If you select the menu item 'World->Parameters...', you will get a new window where you can play with these values. [biogenesis5.png] The general tab sets the amount of time per frame, and whether hardware acceleration is used for display purposes. The world tab lets you set the physical characteristics of the world, such as the size and the initial oxygen and carbon dioxide levels. The organisms tab allows you to set the initial number of organisms and their initial energy levels. You can also set their life span and mutation rate, among other items. The metabolism tab lets you set the parameters around photosynthetic metabolism. The genes tab allows you to set the probabilities and costs for the various genes that can be used to define your organisms.

What about the organisms within your world, though? If you click on one of the organisms, it will be highlighted and the display will change. [biogenesis3.png] The icon toolbar at the top of the window will change to give you actions that apply to organisms. At the bottom of the window, there is an information bar describing the selected organism. It describes physical characteristics of the organism, like the age, energy and mass of the organism. It also describes its relationships to other organisms. It does this by displaying the number of its children, the number of its victims, as well as which generation it is. If you want even more detail about the organism, you can click on the 'Examine genes' button in the bottom bar. This pops up a new window, called the 'Genetic Laboratory', that allows you to look at and alter the genes that make up this organism. [biogenesis4.png] You can add or delete genes, as well as change the parameters of existing genes.

Right-clicking on a particular organism displays a drop-down menu giving you even more tools to work with. The first one allows you to track the selected organism as the world evolves. The next two entries allow you to either feed your organism extra food, or weaken your organism. Normally, organisms need a certain amount of energy before they can reproduce. Selecting the fourth entry would force the selected organism to reproduce immediately, regardless of the energy level. You can also choose to either rejuvenate or outright kill the selected organism. If you want to quickly increase the population of a particular organism, you can simply copy and paste a number of a given organism.

Once you have a particularly interesting organism, you will likely want to be able to save it off so that you can work further with it. When you right-click an organism, one of the options is to export the organism to a file. This pops up a standard save dialog box where you can select the location and filename. The standard file ending for biogenesis genetic code files is '.bgg'. Once you start to have a collection of organisms that you want to work with, you can use them within a given world by right-clicking a blank location on the canvas and selecting the import option. This allows you to pull those saved organisms back into a world that you are working with.

Once you have allowed your world to evolve for a while, you probably would like to see how things are going. Clicking on the menu item 'World->Statistics' will pop up a new window where you can see what is happening within your world. [biogenesis6.png] The top of the window gives you the current statistics. This is the current time, the number of organisms, how many are dead, and what the oxygen and carbon dioxide levels are. It also gives you a bar with the relative proportions of the genes. Below this pane is a list of some remarkable organisms within your world. These are organisms that have had the most children, the most victims or the most infected. That way, you can focus on organisms that are good at the traits that your are interested in. On the right-hand side of the window, you have a display of he world history to date. The top portion displays the history of the population, while the bottom portion displays the history of the atmosphere. As your world continues evolving, you will need to click the update button to get the latest statistics.

This software package could be a great teaching tool when you need to learn about genetics, the environment, and how the two interact. If you find a particularly interesting organism, it is strongly suggested that you share it with the community at the project website. It might be worth a look there for starting organisms, too, allowing you to jump start your explorations.


IMAGES
biogenesis1.png  -  When you first start biogenesis up, you get a blank canvas to start creating your world within.
biogenesis2.png  -  When you start a new world, you get a random selection of organisms to start your ecosystem.
biogenesis3.png  -  You can select individual organisms in order to get information about them, as well as apply different types of actions.
biogenesis4.png  -  The Genetic Laboratory allows you to play with the individual genes that make up the organism.
biogenesis5.png  -  The parameter configuration window allows you to set parameters on the physical characteristics of the world, along with parameters that control the evolution of your organisms.
biogenesis6.png  -  The statistics window gives you a breakdown of what is happening within the world you have created.


URLS
http://biogenesis.sourceforge.net/  -  The main project web site
