Visualizing Molecules with EasyChem


Chemistry is one of the heavy users in computational science. This has been true since the beginning, and is no less true today. Because of this, there are a lot of software packages targeting this user group, specifically. Most of these software packages are focussed on calculating things within chemistry, like bond energies or protein folding structures. But, once you have done the science portion, you need to be able to communicate your results. This is usually in the form of papers published in journals. A part of the information that you are disseminating is imagery of the molecules you are working on. This is where this month's software package, EasyChem, comes into play.

EasyChem is a program that helps generate publication quality images of molecular structures. It should be available in the package management repositories for most distributions. In Debian-based distributions, you can install it with the following command:
   sudo apt-get installed easychem
Once it is installed, you can start it up either from your GUI's menu system or from the command prompt. When it first starts up, you get a blank canvas to start your project within. [easychem1.png] One of the first options you will want to check is whether the option to have helpful messages is turned or not. You can check it by clicking on the menu item "Options->Learning messages". With this selected, you will get helpful information in the bottom bar of the EasyChem window.

Let's start with a simple molecule, like benzene. Benzene is a ring of 6 carbon atoms, with every other bond a double bond. You can create this structure by using the options at the bottom of the draw window. Making sure that the "Add bonds" option is selected, you can pick the "Simple" bond from the drop down of "Bond type". If you now place the mouse pointer somewhere in the window and click and drag, you will get a single bond drawn. To get a ring, you need to hold the control key down, then click and drag. This will draw a ring structure for you. The number of atoms to be used in the ring is set through the "Ring size" option in the bottom left of the window. The default is 6, which is what we want for our benzene ring. In order to get the alternating bond types, you will need to select the "Edit" option at the bottom. Now, you can select individual bonds and change their types. When you select one of the bonds, you will get a new pop up windows where you can change the details. [easychem2.png] You can change the type of bond, along with the color and the relative width if it is a multiple bond.

Once you have some of your diagram constructed, you will likely want to make alterations to the overall look. When you select the first option at the bottom of the window, labeled "Adjust", you can select one or more objects and adjust their position in the diagram. If you have a collection of objects you need to move, you can select them by creating a box around them with your mouse. They will then change color to highlight that they have been selected and you can move them around. If you select a single bond, instead, then the rest of the molecule will be adjusted when you move that one single bond. [easychem3.png] When you select the option "Rotate", you can rotate selections of your diagram. In the current example of a benzene ring, you can't rotate individual bonds. It only makes sense to rotate the complete ring.

You can add ornamentation to the ending of the bonds. These are items like non-bonding pairs, electronic gaps or radicals. If you are creating larger additions to a molecule, you will probably want to build it up from simpler pieces. For example, if you wanted to add an OH group to the benzene ring, you would add a single bond to one of the vertices. Then, at the end of this new bond, you would add a "Atom/Group" bond type. Then, you can add a label to it. [easychem4.png] You also have other decorative options in the bond type list. For example, you could add a circle to the center of the benzene ring. Or, you could add arrows or arcs to indicate transitions.

You can save your images using the native file format. When you click on the menu item "File->Save", a dialog window will pop up asking you to save your work to a file with the ending ".ech". This way you can save your intermediate steps and be able to recreate any output files. When you have your molecule finished, you will want to export it so that you can use it in another of your documents. EasyChem provides several options of exporting your image into encapsulates PostScript files. These files have the filename ending ".eps". If you are writing your paper in LaTeX, this is probably your best option. It will provide the best quality. It also has the ability to save in xfig format. You can then import it into any other software that understands xfig. Both of these options are text-based file formats. They are essentially instructions to a printing device. The final option is to export it to PDF format. While more people may be experienced with PDF files, they are essentially binary in nature. This means that they aren't as easily incorporated into other documents. So, for the most part, you will likely want to accept the default EPS file format.


IMAGES
easychem1.png  -  You get a blank workspace when you first start EasyChem.
easychem2.png  -  EasyChem lets you change several options of individual bonds.
easychem3.png  -  You can move elements of your diagram around, either individually or as a group.
easychem4.png  -  You can use simpler structures to build up more complicated objects.
