Designing Foils with XFLR5


For any object moving through a fluid, forces are applied to the object as the fluid moves around it. A fluid can be something like water, or even something like the air around us. When our object is specially designed to maximize the forces that the fluid can apply, we can name these designs as airfoils. A more common name that most people would use is a wing. The shape of a wing, or airfoil, determines the forces that get applied to it when it moves through a fluid, or the air. These forces also depend on the speed of motion through the fluid and the direction of flow around the airfoil. With all of these parameters, how can we design airfoils? How do we optimize airfoils for a particular use? We need some way of analyzing all of this information, specifically, we need software that can run the numbers and do the calculations. There are very complex pieces of software that can analyze hydrodynamic problems in the abstract. But, with airfoils, we can limit the problem to such a degree that the equations are greatly simplified. One of the software packages available to do these kinds of calculations is XFLR5. XFLR5 started as a fork of the much older xfoils program, but has been extended with extra functionality. Installation in Debian based distributions can be done with the command
   sudo apt-get install xflr5
This command should also install the XFLR5 documentation package, too.

When you start up XFLR5 the first time, it is not very flashy. In fact, on my system, I end up with a plain black window. While you can design your own airfoil from scratch, this can be fairly tedious. It is much easier to take a previously designed airfoil as a starting point and making alterations. A good database of airfoil designs is located at the UIUC Airfoil Coordinates Database, containing nearly 1600 airfoils. The database contains DAT files, which contain the information you need to use in XFLR5. They also have GIF files, allowing you to see what the airfoil looks like before downloading the DAT file. Once you pick one, download the related DAT file and open it in XFLR5 by clicking on the menu item "File->Open". [xflr5_1.png] You can change the view to the OpPoint View by clicking the menu item "View->OpPoint View" or by hitting the F5 key. [xflr5_2.png] At the bottom of the window, you can see airfoil characteristics like the thickness. Let's say that the first design change you need to make is to generate a thinner airfoil. You can do this by clicking the menu item "Design->Scale camber and thickness" or pressing the F9 key. This pops up a new window where you change these characteristics. [xflr5_3.png] When you make your changes and click on OK, XFLR5 will ask you if you want to over-write the current airfoil or if you want to create a new one. If you choose to create a new one, you will be able to switch between the various loaded airfoils using the drop-down at the top of the window. Now, we want to generate the polars to do some analysis on this new airfoil that we created. The easiest way to do this is to click the menu item "Analysis->Batch Analysis". If you have a multi-core or multi-CPU machine, you can select the "Multi-threaded Batch Analysis" menu item instead to get it done more quickly. This pops up a new window where you can select the range of Reynolds numbers to do the analysis over, and the step size for each Reynolds number to use. [xflr5_4.png] You can also select whether to do this for only the current foil, or you can do the analysis for a list of foils. Once you have all of the parameters set, you can click on the "Analyze" button at the bottom of the window. For each step, you will see an output message in the top right-hand pane telling you how many iterations were needed for convergence, and in the bottom left-hand pane you will see the actual plotted values for each iteration of each step. Once it finishes, you can close this analysis window and go back to the main window. The polar view will automatically be opened, showing you all of the polar plots. You can select a single polar plot of interest by clicking on the menu item "Polars->Polar Graphs->" and selecting the graph you want to see. [xflr5_5.png]

Now that we you have a foil and its polars calculated, we can move on to three dimensional analysis and look at a full wing design. Clicking on the menu item "File->Wing and Plane Design" will pop up a new view where you can design a new full wing. Within this new view, you will need to click on the menu item "Wing-Plane->Define a New Wing" to pop up a new window to create your new wing. [xflr5_6.png] You can give it a name, description, and set all kinds of characteristics. You can also select sections of your wing and use the airfoils that you designed in the earlier step to provide the cross-sections of the wing along its length. Once you are happy, you can click on the "Save and Close" button and get your new wing displayed in the main window. You now need to test your wing and analyze how it will behave when it starts moving through the air. Clicking on the menu item "Analysis->Analysis Definition" will bring up a parameter window where you can set up the details of you analysis. [xflr5_7.png] Once everything is set, you can click on the "OK" button to get back to the main window. Depending on what you are trying to do, you may need to set some advanced settings by clicking the menu item "Analysis->Advanced Settings...". Here, you can change items like the maximum number of iterations, the relaxation factor, or the panel boundary conditions. The final step is to set the number of sequential steps in the right-hand pane, under the analysis settings section. Clicking the "Analyze" button in the right-hand pane starts the whole process off. You can also design an entire plane, which is made up of one or more wings, and a tail and fins. You can do this by clicking on the menu item "Wing-Plane->Define a New Plane". In this part of XFLR5, you can define your entire plane and see how it behaves as an entire, complete, object.

With XFLR5, you can now design your very own aircraft wings. This tool should be helpful for anyone, but especially for hobbyists who are designing their own RC aircraft. Cost is no longer a barrier for letting your creativity run wild. You might come up with a totally new, awesome, wing design. You can find more documentation at the main XFLR5 web site that can help you through more complex analysis. Some of it was written based on older versions, however, so the location of certain functions within XFLR5 have moved. So you may need to do some investigative work to figure out how to do similar tasks. But it is definitely worth the minor amount of work involved.


URLs
http://www.xflr5.com/xflr5.htm  -  Main website for XFLR5
http://m-selig.ae.illinois.edu/ads/coord_database.html  -  The UIUC Airfoil Coordinates Database


IMAGES
xflr5_1.png  -  Opening a DAT file loads the data and switches to the polar view.
xflr5_2.png  -  The OpPoint View gives you a traditional cross-section view of an airfoil.
xflr5_3.png  -  A new window lets you change the thickness and camber of your airfoil.
xflr5_4.png  -  You can set the Reynolds number range to do the analysis over.
xflr5_5.png  -  There are several polar graphs showing you the results of your analysis.
xflr5_6.png  -  Once you analyze your airfoil, you can start designing a full wing.
xflr5_7.png  -  You can do an analysis of the entire wing as a whole.
