Astronomy Software by Any Other Name


This month, we will be looking into another option available for the astronomers out there. Specifically, we will be looking at Cartes du Ciel, also known as SkyChart. Similar to other larger astronomy programs, you can use SkyChart from the desktop to the observatory. You probably won't have SkyChart available in your distribution's package management system, so you will have to go to the main web site in order to download it. They have DEB, RPM and TAR files available, so you should be able to use it for just about any distribution out there. There are also downloads available for other operating systems, and even other hardware. You can download a version to run a Raspberry Pi.

When you first start up Cartes du Ciel, you will be asked where on the globe your observatory is located. [cartes1.png] There are a number of locations already listed in the database. If your location is not there, you can enter the latitude and longitude. Once you are done, clicking on the OK button will pop up a new window with the sky at the current time and location. [cartes2.png] Unlike many other astronomy programs, time does not progress automatically. The design is more along the lines of being able to generate viewing charts for observation. There are buttons in the toolbar at the top which allow you to easily update the time.

The default view is to look at the sky at due south. You can change this view by clicking and dragging the star field. If you wanted to center it on a cardinal direction, there are buttons along the bottom right-hand side of the screen. Just above these cardinal direction buttons, there are field of view (FOV) buttons that set the amount of the sky that is visible. Along the left-hand side of the main window are several buttons to turn on and off various coordinate systems and markers. Along the top are a number of toolbars which allow you to select which elements of the sky are visible within the sky chart that you are generating. All of these options are also available as menu items. Clicking on the 'Chart' menu item gives you a list where you can change parameters such as the field of view, the viewing direction, or the coordinate system to use.

Under the 'View' menu item, there are several other informational windows available that you can use to see even more details about what is visible in the sky. For example, when you click on the menu item 'View->Solar System Information...', you get a pop up window with what major objects are visible and when. [cartes3.png] Clicking on each of the entries at the top of the window will pull up the relevant planet as it would look from your current location and at the current time. You can get a kind of preview of what you should see from your telescope. Clicking on the menu item 'View->Calendar...' pops up a window with a table view of several different astronomical events for a given set of dates. [cartes4.png] For example, you can get a list of the positions of several artificial satellites for the dates listed, or the times for twilight or the positions of comets and asteroids. These types of details can be used to point your telescope in order to make your observations.

Speaking of telescopes, there is also the ability to connect directly to your telescope if it includes the functionality of being computer controlled. Clicking on the menu item 'Telescope->Telescope settings...' pops up a window where you can select from one of several telescope control unit drivers. Once you have selected the correct driver, you can click on the menu item 'Telescope->Connect telescope...' to pop up a new window where you can enter the parameters for your particular telescope. [cartes5.png] Once that is done, you can get the telescope to slew, or even track a given point in space. Along with being able to connect to telescopes, Cartes du Ciel also supports the SAMP (Simple Application Messaging Protocol) intercommunication protocol to talk to other pieces of equipment. The networking design is to have several units connected together through a central hub. Cartes du Ciel does not include software to act as a hub, so you will need some other piece of software to act as the hub for your network.

Cartes du Ciel can track several categories of object in the sky. This includes lots of smaller natural objects and man-made objects. These lists are constantly being changed, so there is functionality included to do updates of these catalogs. They are all located under the menu item 'Update'. On this list, you can update the 'Artificial satellites', 'Asteroid elements', 'Comet elements' and the core software. Clicking on any of these menu items will pop up a window which will check for any updates, and automatically download and install them. This way you can always keep Cartes du Ciel as up-to-date as possible. But, even the most robust updating system may miss out on objects that are of special interest to you. In these cases, you can add objects to your catalog manually. 'Clicking on the menu item 'Setup->Catalog...' pops up a new window where you can edit the details of the data catalogs available to Cartes du Ciel. [cartes7.png] If you select the tab 'User defined objects', you can enter a list of individually, manually defined objects so that you can add them to your sky charts.

Once you have a sky chart ready, you can output the results a few different ways. There is a file format specific to Cartes du Ciel that you can save the results to. You also have the option to export the result to an image file (PNG, JPEG or BMP). If you have to travel to get to your telescope and can't bring a computer, you may need more detail than that available from an image. Clicking on the menu item 'View->Object list...' pops up a window with the details of all of the objects in the current view of the main window. [cartes6.png] This includes everything that you should need in order to direct your telescope and make appropriate observations. Hopefully this short article has given you some ideas of how you can get and use the type of data that is used by professional astronomers.



IMAGES
cartes1.png  -  The first step is to set the location that observations will be made from.
cartes2.png  -  The initial display is the sky over your location at the current time.
cartes3.png  -  You can find out what each of the planets looks like from your current location for the current time.
cartes4.png  -  You can get detailed positioning and timing information for objects in the sky that can be used to point your telescope.
cartes5.png  -  You can connect to a telescope that accepts computer instructions to help coordinate and direct your viewing.
cartes6.png  -  You can print out everything you need to be able to make your observations, even if you won't have access to any kind of computing at all.
cartes7.png  -  If necessary, you can manually add objects that may be missing from the standard catalogs of celestial objects.



LINKS
https://www.ap-i.net/skychart/en/start  -  The main web site for SkyChart/Cartes du Ciel
