Night Sky Tools on Android

In previous articles, we have looked at several different astronomy programs that you can run on your Linux machines. This is great when you are doing work indoors, but most laptops and netbooks are still a bit of a pain to carry around with you if you are going out in the field. In these cases, having something more portable is a definite advantage. Since we are beginning to look at Android apps in this column, this is a perfect opportunity. There are loads of astronomy applications available within the Android environment that are well worth a look. This month, in particular, we will take a look at Night Sky Tools. The application is available in the Google Play store, and should run on most versions of Android.

Once you have it installed, you should open it to see a very complete menu of all of the functionality available within Night Sky Tools. [nst01.png] Many of the functions available are automatically updated over the Internet, so you are sure to have the latest information for whatever objects you are trying to observe in the night sky. The first category is general astronomical information. You can see lists of upcoming astronomical events, as well as what is up right now and what will be coming up tonight. There are also entries for a compass and a page of the various astronomical times that you may need. The astronomical time page also tells you the moonrise/moonset and sunrise/sunset times. There is even a page that lets you calculate the visual limiting magnitude based on the actual environmental conditions like temperature and humidity. The last page in this section is the sky map. [nst02.png] The information provided in the sky map is rather complete. You can see the stars, and constellations, along with the formal constellation boundaries. It will even display artwork for each of the constellations, showing you what they are supposed to look like.

The next section has information on the Earth and Moon. When moving between sections, you should be aware that the other sections do not automatically close. You need to close them yourself when you are done with them. You can pull up a daylight map, showing what parts of the Earth are in daylight and which are in night. [nst03.png] There are pages that let you know when the solar and lunar eclipse happen this year, along with when the equinoxes and solstices happen. The meteor page gives a listing of all of the known meteor showers, with the start, peak and end dates. It also, helpfully, gives the percentage of the moon phase so that you can tell right away whether the night will be dark enough to have a good observing period. The moon map, by default, shows a full listing of sites of interest. [nst04.png] Tapping on one of these points brings up a text label with the name of the site.

The solar system category extends available information farther out into space. The Conjunction/Opposition page provides a list of all times this year when planets either form a conjunction or an opposition. There are two pages, one for comets and one for near-Earth asteroids, where you can search for detailed information on specific comets or asteroids. You can also click the update button to pull a fresh listing from the Internet of what objects are known. There are four large moons that orbit Jupiter which are visible in a large pair of binoculars. Clicking on the Jupiter's Moons page brings up a map of their relative locations around Jupiter. [nst05.png] There is a related page that gives you the positions of the largest of Saturn's moons, too. [nst06.png] These will require at least a small telescope, though. The Planetary Orbits page takes this even farther out to see the relative positions of all of the planets within the solar system [nst07.png] As with the Moon map described above, this section includes a Mars map, also with pins at locations of interest. [nst08.png]

The stars category takes you even farther out into space. The first selection gives you a list of the 300 brightest stars in the sky. The list includes the name, magnitude and location for each of these stars. The entire sky is divided up into constellations. The constellations page pulls up details information for the selected constellation. [nst09.png] There are also pages giving you theoretical information about astronomy. For example, you can pull up a Hertzsprung-Russell Diagram showing how stars are categorized. [nst10.png] The stellar classification page describes what the 10 classes of stars are, with their temperature, mass, radius and luminosity characteristics. The last two pages in this section give you the ability to search for information on variable stars and visual binary stars.

The deep sky section contains pages for several of the deep sky catalogs. The Caldwell and Messier catalogs are displayed as a list of all of the objects within the catalog. You can click on the object of interest and pull up detailed information for it. [nst11.png] There are also sections where you can do searches for exoplanets, and NGC/IC catalog objects. The remainder of the sections provide functions to do common calculations that you run into when doing astronomy. You can handle coordinate calculations, astrophotography and telescope calculations. The observation log helps you to track your own information. There is a page to manage all of your astronomical equipment, like telescopes, eyepieces, filters and cameras. You can also log all of your observations, recording all of the details that could be of any interest when doing astronomy. You can export your log, including whatever sections you need, so that you can incorporate it into some other database of your research.

Now that you have a portable way of carrying your astronomy information around with you, you have no excuse for not going out and exploring the skies above you. Over the next few months, we will look at several other scientific applications that you can use on your Android devices for doing portable science.


IMAGES
nst01.png  -  The opening screen displays a menu of the various categories of functions available.
nst02.png  -  The sky map gives you a display of what the sky looks like right now.
nst03.png  -  The daylight map shows you what parts of the Earth are in light and which are in dark.
nst04.png  -  The moon map shows points of interest with pins on the map.
nst05.png  -  You can get a map of the locations of the four main Jovian moons.
nst06.png  -  You can get a map of the largest of Saturn's moons, too.
nst07.png  -  The relative locations of all of the planets are available on the Planetary Orbits page.
nst08.png  -  There is a Mars map with locations of interest.
nst09.png  -  You can get detailed information on constellations, including a map.
nst10.png  -  The Hertzsprung-Russell diagram shows how stars are categorized.
nst11.png  -  You can get detailed information on Messier catalog objects.
