Graphics and Stats in One Easy Package


As always in experimental science, you need to analyze the data you collect to see what it is telling you about the world. In the beginning stages, you need to be able to do some graphical analysis to get an overall view of any trends being caught by your experiment. Once you get to the point of having a model that you want to test, you then have to run some statistical tests to see how well your model fits the data. It is always more convenient to learn one tool rather than two. To this end, there is the package SciDAVis (Scientific Data Analysis and Visualization). SciDAVis started life as a fork of QtiPlot. It has since moved quite a bit from the original codebase with the addition of several new features and changes to the underlying data structures. The functionality it provides is similar to commercial programs like Origin and SigmaPlot. It is also similar to another Open Source program called LabPlot. In fact, starting in 2008, these two projects started working together on a common back-end while continuing with their own front-ends and their own feature sets. In this article, we'll take a quick look at some of the things you can do with SciDAVis to do your own data analysis tasks.

To start with, you need to get SciDAVis installed. You should have a package available in most distributions. In Debian-based ones, you would install it with
   sudo apt-get install scidavis
There are also binaries available for Mac OSX. If you don't have binaries available, you can download the source tarball and build it specifically for your system. You will need to have the Qt libraries installed, since the interface is built using them. When you first start SciDAVis, you get an empty project and an empty data table of two columns of numeric values. [Picture1] Selecting a column will display the details of that column in a window on the right-hand side. Selecting the description tab lets you change the name of the column, as well as add a comment describing what the column represents. The type tab lets you change what kind of data you can enter for this column from numeric to text, month names, day names or full dates. You can also set the format of the data type for each column. When you are just learning to use SciDAVis, you just need some junk data to play with. You can do this easily by right-clicking the columns and selecting "Fill Selection with". You can then fill the column with either row numbers or random numbers. Once you have some data available, you can create new columns that are functions of the values stored in the other columns. To access this functionality, you will need to select the formula tab in the right-hand side pane. In order to play with some of the other features, we'll set the first column to be the row numbers and the second column to be a set of random numbers.

One of the first things you will want to do is to plot the data to see what it looks like. To do a basic plot, you can just right click on a column and select "Plot". If you are just doing an initial look at the shape of the data, you can select "Plot -> Line" or "Plot -> Scatter". The x axis is simply the index values and the y values are the data elements from the column. If you want to do more complicated plots, SciDAVis provides a full plotting wizard. To access the wizard, you will need either press "Ctrl-Alt-W" or click on "View -> Plot Wizard". This will pop up a new window where you can select which columns will be used for the x, y and z axes. You also have the option of selecting columns to represent the errors for the x and y axes. You need to create a new curve where you can set the relevant columns. You can create multiple curves that will all get plotted on the same graph. You then get a new window with the plots generated. The point of SciDAVis is to make this type of work easy, so you can double click on the various elements to edit the details of your graphs. Double clicking on the title, or the axis labels, will pop up a window where you can change the content and the display. You can also change the details of the axes themselves. Double clicking on an axis will pop up a new window where you can set the scale, the type of grid, the axis displays and a set of general options. Each of these sets of options is available under its own tab in the option window. Once you have the graph looking the way you want it to, you will want a copy for your publications. To do this, you can either right-click on the graph and select "Export" or you can click on the menu item "File -> Export Graph". You can then select the file format you want to save off the image to.

While graphs can be very useful when trying to get an intuitive grasp of the shape of your data, you do need to back up this intuition with hard numbers. The first thing to do, usually, is to simply look at the column statistics. Right-clicking on the column, you would select "Column Statistics". This will create a new table where you will get the number of rows in the column, along with other statistics like the standard deviation, variance, sum, minimum, and maximum. You can see if there is any correlation between two columns. You need to select two columns from your table, and then click on the menu item "Analysis -> Correlate". This will pop up a new graph window showing a picture of the correlation. Two new columns will be added to your data table where you can find the lag and correlation values of this particular analysis. If the data you are looking at has some type of periodicity, you can calculate an FFT of it to see the spread of frequencies within your data. By selecting a column and clicking on the menu item "Analysis -> FFT", you will get a pop up window where you can select the details of the FFT you want to calculate. Once these are set, you can click on "OK" and a new graph window will be displayed with the FFT plotted.

Once you have had a chance to look at your data, you may have started to form an idea of a model that represents the system that you were measuring. An idea is not enough, however. You need to actually do some calculations and see whether your model fits the data you collected. There are two options available to you. The first is to use the fit wizard. You access it by clicking on the menu item "Analysis -> Fit Wizard". This will pop up a window where you can build up a function describing your model. Once you have built up your model, you need to click on the button "Fit". This will pop up a new window where you can select the details of doing the actual fitting of the generic function to your data. Here you can set the initial guesses, and select the algorithm used to do the actual fitting. You can also set how many iterations to try and the tolerance of when you can stop. When everything is set to your satisfaction, you click on the "Fit" button. This will pop up a new graph window, plus an output window detailing the results of trying to do the fit. The other option of trying to fit your model is to start with your initial graph. In this case, you start by right-clicking the main graph window and selecting the "Analyze" option. This will open a sub-menu where you can select one of a number of common defaults, such as linear, polynomial, exponential growth or decay, among several others. You can also open the fit wizard from this sub-menu.

This article has only been a very short introduction. There are lots of other functions available if you are willing to go through the manual. Also, you have the option of using Python as a scripting language within SciDAVis in order to do even more complicated data analysis. You might need to compile from source, however, if the binaries available to you don't include this functionality. Hopefully, you take the time to learn what may be a very useful tool to help you analyze your experimental data.



Images


Links

http://scidavis.sourceforge.net
