Elemental Linux


In previous issues, we have looked at a number of chemistry packages, and all of the computational chemistry that you can do in a Linux environment. But, what is fundamental to chemistry? Why, the elements of course. So, this month we will focus on learning more about the elements that make up everything around us. To that end, this month we will look at a program called kalzium. Kalzium is kind of like a periodic table on steroids. Not only does it have information on each of the elements, it also has extra functionality to do other types of calculations, etc.

Kalzium should be available within the package repositories for most distributions. In Debian-based distributions, you can install it with the command
   sudo apt-get install kalzium
When you start it up, you get a simplified view of the classical periodic table. [kalzium1.png] You can change this overall view by either clicking on the drop down menu in the top left side of the window, or by clicking on the menu item "View->Tables". You can select from 5 different display formats. Clicking one of the elements pops open a new window with detailed information. [kalzium2.png] The default detail pane is an overview the various physical characteristics of the given element. This includes items such as the melting point, electron affinity or atomic mass. There are also 5 other information panes available. The atom model gives you a graphical representation of the electron orbitals around the nucleus of the given atom. The isotopes pane gives you a table of values for each of the known isotopes for the selected element, ordered by neutron number. This includes items such as the atomic mass, or the half-life for radioactive isotopes. The miscellaneous detail pane includes some of the extra facts and trivia that might be of interest. The spectrum detail pane shows the emission and absorption spectra, both as a graphical display and a table of values. [kalzium3.png] The last detail pane provides a list of external links where you can learn more about the selected element. This includes links to Wikipedia, the Jefferson Lab and the Webelements site.

Clicking on the menu item "Tools->Isotope Table..." pops up a new window with a display of all of the known isotopes. [kalzium4.png] Within this window, you can use your mouse to navigate around. The mouse wheel zooms you in and out to a section of the display. You can click and drag the view port to different sections of the isotope display. Once you have found the isotope that you are interested in, you can right-click on the given square to get details pulled up on the left-hand side of the window. Here, you can find out about the number of nucleons, the half-life if the isotope is unstable, as well as the relative abundance. For those isotopes that are unstable, the display is colour coded based on the type of radiation that the radioactive element gives off. Clicking on the menu item "Tools->Plot Data..." opens up yet another new window. [kalzium5.png] In this window, you can select various characteristics of the elements and plot them. This is very helpful for those people who think better with visual information. You can select from atomic number, atomic mass, electronegativity, melting point, boiling point atomic radius or covalent radius as the potential data sources. You can then select which elements are selected to be plotted.

Kalzium is also very handy for those learning more about chemistry, such as new students. To this end, it includes a glossary and a table of definitions. The glossary explains terms relevant to both knowledge and tools. [kalzium6.png] One slightly odd thing that I noticed was that I had to double click the label in the left-hand pane in order to get the contents actually displayed in the right-hand pane. If you are particularly new to science, you may not know Greek symbols or size prefixes for numbers. If this is the case, you can click on the menu item "Tools->Tables...". [kalzium7.png] This way, you can easily get reminders about what a hectameter, for instance, works out to be.

The last section we will look at is the group of calculators that kalzium provides. You can click on the menu item "Tools->Perform Calculations..." to pop up a new window. You can do calculations on molecular mass, concentration, nuclear information, gas information, titration or equation balancing. In the molecular mass calculator, you can enter a chemical formula and have the total molecular mass calculated. [kalzium8.png] There are cases where you will have larger units of molecules, especially in organic chemistry. In these cases, you can create aliases of these units, such as alcohols or benzene rings. This makes it easier to create your molecular formula. The second calculator figures out concentrations, in moles, for given amounts of solute and solvent. [kalzium9.png] Here, you can adjust the various amounts of both the solvent and the solute to figure out what concentration you end up with. The third calculator is the nuclear calculator. [kalzium10.png] Here, you can select an isotope, with its isotope mass and its half-life. You can the solve for either an initial amount, a final amount, or the time to get between an initial and a final amount. The fourth calculator takes the gas law and dynamically calculates the other values when you change one of the values. [kalzium11.png] Kalzium lets you play with the temperature, pressure and volume, given the set of gas parameters molar mass and number of moles. This can be useful when you first start to play with how gases respond to temperature and pressure changes. The fifth calculator provides titration calculations. [kalzium12.png] Here, you can enter experimental values of pH and volume, and then kalzium will try to plot the inputs and figuring out a theoretical equation. The last calculator is the equation solver. [kalzium13.png] You can enter a chemical equation, where you enter unknowns as lower case letters placed in front of the element symbols. When you click on the calculate button, kalzium will figure out what value those lower case variables should have.

Hopefully, this month's package should come in handy. I think this will be especially true for students just getting started in chemistry. In these cases, the extra tools available in kalzium should prove useful for those people just getting started.



IMAGES
kalzium1.png  -  The default view is of the classical ordering of the elements.
kalzium2.png  -  Kalzium provides a large number of details for each element.
kalzium3.png  -  For those elements that are stable enough, you can even see the emission and absorption spectra.
kalzium4.png  -  You can get information about all of the known isotopes through an intuitive interface.
kalzium5.png  -  For those of you who are more visual, you can easily plot relationships between various characteristics of the elements.
kalzium6.png  -  If you are new to chemistry, you can use the glossary to learn more about the domain specific jargon that you are likely to run into.
kalzium7.png  -  If you are new to science, you can learn Greek and SI prefixes with this table of information.
kalzium8.png  -  You can get kalzium to figure out the mass of a given molecular formula.
kalzium9.png  -  Kalzium provides a calculator to help you figure out the molarity for a given solution.
kalzium10.png  -  You can figure out how long a given piece of radioactive material will hang around.
kalzium11.png  -  Kalzium provides a calculator that simplifies the calculations defined by the gas law.
kalzium12.png  -  If you are playing with acids and bases, kalzium provides a titration calculator.
kalzium13.png  -  Kalzium can take a given chemical equation and figure out missing values to make the equation balance.
