Editing Your Own OpenStreet Maps

We've looked at a few different mapping applications in previous instalments. In this issue, we will look at a tool that you can use to create your own maps, called josm (Java OpenStreetMaps editor). This tool allows you to build your own maps based on data from OpenStreetMaps, other online sources, or your own data. You can make edits, add annotations, and then upload your results back up to the OpenStreetMaps server. There are two ways you can run josm. The first is to install it on your system. If you have it within your package management system, you may want to install that way so that any required dependencies are installed automatically. For example, the following command will install it on Debian-based systems.
   sudo apt-get install josm josm-plugins
You should have noticed that the command also installed the package of plugins for josm. There are large number of plugins available from the community on the main project website. If you want the latest version, you can download a jar file from the project website. The second way to run josm is actually using a Java Web Start package. You can launch the JNLP file, again from the main project website.

Once you have started josm, in whichever way you have chosen to use it, you will get a window with an information panel about updates and startup information. [josm1.png] There are also links to online help information and the community forums. Now you can start creating your first map. The easiest way to get started is to down load OpenStreetMap data as a starting point. Clicking on the menu item "File->Download from OSM..." will pop up a new window where you can select and area to use as your map base. [josm2.png] At the top of this window, you can select what to data to download. The choices are OSM data, raw GPS data and additional notes. Within the map window, you can pan around to the area of interest and zoom in to an appropriate level. You then click and drag with your mouse to select a box of the area that you want to use in your map. You will need to be careful with how big a bounding box you select, since the data server limits how much data you can pull at once. Luckily, you will get a warning at the bottom of the window if the bounding box is too big. Once you have your selection made, you can either click on the download button to download it as a new map, or you can click the option "Download as a new layer" at the bottom of the map pane first to add this data to an already existing map. For now, we will just click the download button to get a brand new map started. [josm3.png]

Looking at the new map, you can see that there is a lot of information available and a lot of functionality that you can use to interact with that information. On the left hand side, there is a strip of icon buttons that you can pick from to interact with the map data. On the right hand side, there are several panes that can show the layers and detailed information of selected objects on the map. You can change which panes are visible on the right hand side by clicking on the menu item "Windows" and selecting those panes that you are interested in. If you select an object on the map, such as a road section or water way, the details of that selected object will show up in the information panes on the right hand side.

Raw geographical information is not the only data sources that are available to you. Clicking the menu item "Imagery" will give you a menu of possible data sources where you can download geographical images. This list can be changed by clicking on the menu item "Imagery->Imagery Preferences" and select the sources you want to use. [josm4.png] In the image below, I selected the menu item "Imagery->OpenStreetMap Carto (Standard layer)" to get the cartographic imagery for my map area. [josm5.png] You can select the layer you want to work on by selecting it in the "Layers" pane at the top of the right hand side. You can change the order that the layers are stacked, or change whether they are visible or not. If you have your own imagery available, you can click on the menu item "Imagery->Rectified Image..." to select the server where your imagery is being served from.

What we have covered so far is fine if you want static maps of pre-existing data. But that isn't very interesting. The last bit of functionality we will look at is adding your own data to these maps. You can add nodes, or a series on nodes, by selecting the appropriate tool from the list of icons at the top of the left hand side. When you add a node, you can tag it as a particular type of node, or group of nodes. There are a large number of preset types that you can access by clicking the menu item "Presets". These presets include natural objects, man-made objects and lots of geological features. This allows you to start adding tracks, objects and other features that are based on local knowledge, which means that you can create very specialized maps of your area.

Clicking the menu item "Edit->Preferences" brings up the preferences window for josm. There are a lot of options that you can tweak to change how josm works. [josm6.png] The "Map Settings" tab lets you change the main display options, such as the projection, or the mapping styles available for use in josm. [josm7.png] As was mentioned earlier, there is a large selection of plugins available from the community of josm users. You can access this library from the "Plugins" tab, where you can download activate those plugins that you are interested in playing with. [josm8.png] Once you start looking at the available options, you can see that there is a lot of extended functionality available to do some serious work with your maps.

When you are happy with your map, you will want to save all of this work. Josm can save all of the data related to your map in one of many different geographical file formats. Clicking on the menu item "File->Save As..." will pop up a save window where you can select from file formats such as GPX, GeoJSON or OSM Server Files. You can also upload changes back the OpenStreetMaps servers if you are adding previously unknown information, too.



IMAGES
josm1.png  -  When you first start josm, you get an information panel.
josm2.png  -  You can select and download an area of the Earth as your map base.
josm3.png  -  You can download OpenStreetMaps data to start a brand new map.
josm4.png  -  You can select the data sources used for downloading geographical imagery data.
josm5.png  -  You can add multiple layers with satellite imagery or cartographic imagery.
josm6.png  -  The preferences window lets you tweak a lot of the functionality in josm.
josm7.png  -  The "Map Settings" tab lets you select and download alternate mapping styles for your map display.
josm8.png  -  The "Plugins" tab lets you select from a large library of available plugins.



URLS
https://josm.openstreetmap.de  -  Main project web site
