Drawing Feynman diagrams for fun and profit


The last few months, we have looked at several pieces of chemistry software. This month we will move over into physics and look at a software package called jaxodraw. In physics, there is a powerful technique used for visualizing particle interactions at the quantum level. This technique uses something called Feynman diagrams, invented by physicist Richard Feynman. These diagrams help visualize what happens when one or more particles has some kind of interaction. I say one or more because a single particle could spontaneously kick out other particle/anti-particle pairs and then swallow them back up again. Needless to say, quantum physics is weird. When they were first developed, theoretical physics was mostly done either with pen and paper or on a chalkboard. There was not much thought given to how you could render these drawings within a document being written on a computer. Jaxodraw is meant to help fill in that gap in document layout and provide the ability to render these correctly and give you output that you can use in your own documents.

Jaxodraw is written in Java, and so should run under almost any operating system. Unfortunately, it isn't likely to be in the package repository for most distributions. This means that you will need to download it from the project web site. Fortunately, because it is packaged as a jar file, it is relatively easy to run. You need to download the binary package and unpack it on your machine. Then you will want to open up a terminal and change directory to the location where you unpacked jaxodraw. You can then start it up by simply typing in the following.
   java -jar jaxodraw-2.1.0.jar
This opens up a blank workspace where you can start your diagram. [jaxodraw1.png] On the left-hand side of the window, you will see a palette of all of the available drawing elements that you can use to generate your diagram.

To see what is involved, let's look at how we could draw an electron interacting with a photon. This happens when energy is absorbed or emitted by an electron. Since we are looking at an interaction, you will want to start by selecting the vertex button from the palette and draw one in the window. Coming into this vertex will be a fermion line, for the electron, and a photon line for the incoming electromagnetic energy. The interaction happens at the vertex, with a second fermion line coming out the other end. [jaxodraw2.png] You can continue adding more elements, such as loops or bezier lines. You also have the choice of other particle types, such as scalar particles, ghost particles or gluons. If you click on the edit button in the function palette on the left-hand side and then select one of the elements of your diagram, you will get a pop up window. [jaxodraw4.png] Here you can edit parameters such as the position, the size and location of any extra parts, like arrow heads, or the color used for a given element. This edit window varies based on what parameters can be changed for a given element.

Jaxodraw also includes a plugin architecture, where you can extend the functionality. There is a list of current plugins available at the plugin web site, which currently consist of other exporters to generate other file types of your diagrams. There is also a set of instructions on how you can create your own plugins. Once you download the plugin file, you can click on the menu item 'Options->Plugin Manager' to pop up a dialog window where you can install the plugin within your installation of jaxodraw.

By default, jaxodraw saves your diagrams as an XML file. Since it is a text file that simply contains essentially a description of the elements of your diagram, you could theoretically manipulate them with something as basic as a text editor. But this isn't the reason why you want to use jaxodraw. If you click on the menu item 'File->Export', a dialog window pops up where you can choose the details of how to export your diagram. [jaxodraw3.png] Since jaxodraw aimed at physicists, you will most want to export your diagram into a form that you can use easily within LaTeX documents. This is the most often used document layout system when theoretical physicists write journal articles. If this is the case, you actually have two options. You can save it as a pure LaTeX file that you can include in your document. Or, you can export as an encapsulated PostScript (EPS) file which can also be manipulated within your document. If, instead, you are using something else to generate your document you can export your diagram in some type of regular image format. The ones currently supported are JPEG and PNG. You should be able to generate diagrams regardless of your needs with these options.



URLS
http://jaxodraw.sourceforge.net/  -  The main web site for jaxodraw
http://jaxodraw.sourceforge.net/plugins/projects-overview.html  -  List of available plugins
http://jaxodraw.sourceforge.net/reference/plugins.html  -  Instructions on how to write your own plugin



IMAGES
jaxodraw1.png  -  When you first open jaxodraw, you get a blank workspace where you can start diagramming your quantum particle interaction.
jaxodraw2.png  -  A basic interaction is an electron absorbing a photon's worth of energy and continuing on.
jaxodraw3.png  -  You can export your Feynman diagram in several different formats.
jaxodraw4.png  -  You can edit several parameters of the elements within your diagram.
