Astronomy on KDE


I recently moved to using KDE and plasma as my main desktop environment. As such, I thought I should start digging into some of the scientific software available on KDE. This month, we'll start by looking at kstars, the desktop astronomy program. It probably won't be installed with the standard KDE desktop, so you may need to install it. If you are using a Debian based distribution, you can install kstars with the following command.
   sudo apt-get install kstars
When you start it up the first time, kstars will ask you for your current location. It then will give you the option of installing several extra information files to add to the list of objects that kstars knows about and can display. Once these steps are done, kstars will start with the current sky at the location you entered earlier. [kstars1.png]

So, what can we do with kstars? If you have used programs like stellarium before, you will find that you can handle the same types of tasks with kstars. You can use your mouse to click and drag the display to change the direction that you are facing. The cardinal directions are labelled along the outside of the circle of the sky. You can zoom in and out to change the field of view. If there is an object of interest, you can double click it to center it on the display and tag it as the current object of interest. Depending on what catalogues of data that you installed, some of the object may have have more or less information available. For example, selecting the planet Uranus and zooming all the way in shows a reasonably detailed image of the planet, including the ring orientation. [kstars2.png] You have quite a few options available to control what is shown in the main window. The toolbar across the top of the window allows you to toggle the following items: stars, deep sky objects, solar system objects, supernovae, satellites, constellation lines, constellation names, constellation art, constellation boundaries, milky way, equatorial coordinate grid, horizontal coordinate grid, and opaque ground. This allows you to customize the display so that it only shows what you are interested in at the time. The last display option is to toggle the "What's Interesting" pane. [kstars3.png] You can click on one of the items in the pane and then and objects of that type get highlighted in the display. The pane also changes to show a detailed list of all of these objects.

What if you wanted to change the current viewing conditions? Maybe you wanted to see what is going to be visible when you are on vacation next week. In this case you can change the time and location fairly easily. To change the location, you can click on the globe in the toolbar to pop up the location dialog. [kstars4.png] As well, clicking on the clock icon in the toolbar pops up the time dialog to set the viewing time and date. [kstars5.png] You can now see what would be visible from anywhere and anywhen. You can also change what information is available. If you declined to download extra data when you first started kstars, you can go back in to that section and select some extra catalogues. Clicking on the menu item "Data->Download New Data..." will pop up a dialog window where you can select which extra catalogues are to be installed. [kstars6.png] For objects that vary over time, you can download updated data by clicking on the menu item "Data->Updates->" and selecting one of comets, asteroids, satellites or recent supernovae.

The last bit of functionality we will look at with kstars is the ability to work with physical devices. If your telescope supports computer control, you can use kstars to connect to it and give it instructions on what to do. Clicking on the menu item "Tools->Devices->Telescope Wizard..." will pop up a new window to walk you through the steps to add your telescope's details to kstars. [kstars7.png] You can manage these telescopes, along with a huge number of other potential devices, by clicking the menu item "Tools->Devices->Device Manager". [kstars8.png] This pops up a window of devices that kstars understands, grouped by type. Kstars also understands Ekos, the cross-platform observatory control and automation tool from the Open Astronomy Instrumentation group. They also provide the Instrument Neutral Distributed Interface (INDI) library, which kstars also understands. Clicking on the menu item "Tools->Ekos" pops up a new window where you can go through the steps required to control your entire observatory. You can create a profile of which devices are going to be used, then start the INDI library and connect to those devices. You can then start collecting data from the sensor devices that you defined in the profile.

While there are several options available to do astronomy from the desktop, if you are already using the KDE environment you should definitely look at kstars. It has all of the usual features that you are likely looking for, along with being tightly integrated to the KDE environment of applications. Hopefully this article piques your interest enough to give it a whirl.



IMAGES
kstars1.png  -  On startup, kstars will show you the current layout of the sky in your location.
kstars2.png  -  You can easily select and zoom in to objects of interest in kstars.
kstars3.png  -  The "What's Interesting" pane lets you focus on some particular type of object visible in the sky with the current location and time.
kstars4.png  -  The location dialog allows you to set where in the world you are to see what is visible in the sky from that location.
kstars5.png  -  The time dialog allows you to set the time and date to see what would be visible at that time and date.
kstars6.png  -  You can select from several extra data catalogues to add even more objects to kstars.
kstars7.png  -  You can go through the telescope wizard to add the details for your particular device and allow kstars to communicate with it.
kstars8.png  -  There are a large number of potential devices that you can control with kstars.
