Smith Charts for All

In the past, we have looked at several different programs that are useful when doing electrical engineering. This month, we will look at a program, called linsmith, that helps you do calculations or see how different parameters behave. Linsmith is a program that allows you to generate Smith charts for problems in electrical engineering, especially RF (radio frequency) circuits. Smith charts a graphical way of representing the rather complex interactions that can happen when dealing with multiple non-linear electrical components. You can use them to see how they interact and what happens if you vary some of the parameters. We'll see how to use linsmith to try and make this task a little easier. Throughout this article, I will be assuming that you know enough about electrical circuits that I won't need to explain too many of the terms I will be using. If you want to learn more, a good place to start would be the Wikipedia page for Smith charts.

To start with, you will want to install it on your system. It should be the package management system for your preferred distribution. For example, you can install it on Debian-based distributions with the command
   sudo apt-get install linsmith
Once it is installed, you can start it up either by finding it within the menu system for your desktop environment, or by running the command 'linsmith' within a terminal window. This program is strictly a graphical one, so you will need to be running X11 in order to use it. When it first starts up, you will see a blank Smith chart, ready for use. [linsmith1.png] On the right-hand side of the main window is a set of tabbed panels where you can enter the details of the electrical problem that you are working on. This section is broken into loads that you can apply to the system, a circuit tab where you can define discrete circuit elements that are part of the problem, and a results tab where you can find a running log of the calculations being made.

We will start off by looking at what you can do in terms of applying loads to the system using the Loads tab. This section is actually further broken down into three more sub-tabs. The first one is labelled 'R + jX'. This tab allows you to enter a load characterized by a frequency, given in mega-Hertz, and an impedance, given as a complex-valued number of Ohms. For example, you could enter a load of 140MHz, with an impedance of (25+j40)Ohms, by entering these values in the appropriate boxes and then hitting the button labelled 'New' directly below them. This will place a new load value in the table of load impedances, as well as displaying a new yellow dot representing this load on the Smith chart. [linsmith2.png] Now that you have a load, you can alter it by adding in extra components. You can do this by clicking on the tab labelled 'Circuit'. In the section labelled 'Component', you can select from such elements as capacitors, inductors or even transformers. For each of these components, you have a different set of parameters that you can use to define your new component. As an example, you could add a capacitor of 40pF by clicking on the capacitor button, and entering the value in the text box labelled 'Capacitor value:'. If you don't recognize the different component symbols, you can simply hover over them to see a text box appear. Once you have the values all set, you can click on the 'New' button just below the component section to add this element to your Smith chart. This will add a red line and a red end-point on the Smith chart. [linsmith3.png] In all cases, you can select an element that already exists to edit its values. When you select an item, you can edit its parameters in the appropriate boxes in the top of the pane. Once you are done, you will need to click on the 'Update' button in order to have these changes applied to your Smith chart. These elements can be added either in series or in parallel. This option is in the section of the right-hand side panel labelled 'Connection'.

Clicking on the menu item 'Edit->Preferences' will open a new window where you can set several preferences for how linsmith can work. [linsmith4.png] There are several tabs covering several sections of options available. The first tab, label-ed 'General', sets the most basic of parameters. The screen tab lets you set the image used as the background of the Smith chart, along with what colours are to be used for the various elements. The printing tab lets you set the paper size and margins, along with the colours to use for each of the parts of your Smith chart.

In the main display, you should see a number of informational displays for your problem on the bottom bar. This is a Z Smith chart, so the values at the far left-hand side of the bottom bar are coordinates within the chart. On the right-hand side, there is a display of the SWR, or Standing Wave Ratio, as well as the Q value for the problem. After this, there is a set of zoom buttons, where you can zoom in on sections of the chart to see further details. There is also a button to recalculate the results of the Smith chart based on changes you may have made. The last two options allow you to change the base values of the Smith chart. You can rotate the chart, either to the load or to the generator. You can also change the normalization impedance from the default 50 Ohms to one of 75, 150, 300 or 600.

Once you are done, you can save off your work in a few different ways. Under the 'File' menu item, you can selectively save off either circuit details or load details as a separate file. Each of these sub-menus allow you to save data, or load previous data. You can also import data from CSV files and s2p files. To save off the final results, you can print the resultant Smith chart by either typing 'Ctrl-P', or by selecting the menu item 'File->Print'. This way, you can save the chart to a PDF file. Hopefully, this is a useful tool that those of you who do electrical engineering can add to your toolboxes.


URL
http://jcoppens.com/soft/linsmith/index.en.php  -  The main website for linsmith
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smith_chart  -  A description of Smith charts



IMAGES
linsmith1.png  -  When you first start linsmith up, you will see a blank Smith chart, ready for your use.
linsmith2.png  -  Adding a new load adds a yellow point to the Smith chart.
linsmith3.png  -  You can add components, such as capacitors.
linsmith4.png  -  There are a number of parameters that you can set using the preferences window.
