Linux Help for Neuroscientists


In the past, we have looked at distributions that were built with some scientific discipline in mind. This month, we will take a look at yet another one. In this case, we will checkout what is provided by neurodebian. [neuro1.png] We should probably start by clarifying that neurodebian is not strictly a Linux distribution in the classical sense. The people behind neurodebian began by working on PyMVPA, a Python package to do multivariate pattern analysis of neural data. To make this package easy to deploy, neurodebian was created. Over time, more and more packages were added to neurodebian to try and create the ultimate integrated environment for neuroscience. All of this work is described in a scientific paper, "Open is not enough. Let's take the next step: an integrated, community-driven computing platform for neuroscience". This paper is available at the web site "frontiers in NEUROINFORMATICS".

Installing neurodebian is a bit different from other distributions. On the main home page, there is a section called "Get NeuroDebian". [neuro2.png] Here you can select which distribution you use as your desktop and which mirror you want to download from. You then get a couple of commands that you need to run on your system. The first one is a wget command meant to download an entry for APT and store it in a source file in the directory /etc/apt/sources.list.d/. The second command uses apt-key to go out to the MIT PGP key server to download and install the key used to verify the neurodebian packages. Once these two commands have been run, you can then do

   sudo apt-get update

to download the package definitions for everything provided by neurodebian. This works well if you are already running some version of Debian, or a derivative like Ubuntu, as your desktop operating system. But what can you do if you are running Windows or Mac OSX? The neurodebian project provides a virtual machine option for these people. If you select either Windows or Mac OSX as the operating system in the download section, you will be provided with a link to download an OVA file. This type of file is a standard file format for virtual machines. For example, you can import this file into Virtual Box. [neuro3.png] This virtual machine uses Debian 7, or Wheezy, as the core operating system. The main websites says that Gnome is used as the desktop environment. However, when I actaully installed the latest version of the virtual machine, the desktop environment that is used is XFCE. You could even use this on your Linux desktop in a virtual machine. This way, you always have a stable, complete computing environment for neuroscience that you know will not change or be broken. When you first start up this virtual machine, you will be presented with some configuration steps. The first step is to do an update of the installed packages. After this, you will be asked whether you want to take part in an application survey. If you are using Neurodebian regularly, you may want to take part in order to provide feedback to the team. There are several tools that require environment variables to be set. The next step asks you whether you want these to be set automatically in the default profile settings. The next step allows you to select several extra packages like Emacs, a PyMVPA tutorial and R. Be prepared for a bit of a wait, as there are several packages to be downloaded. In my case, I ended up with a download of 625MB of extra packages. After all of the configuration steps are completed, you can click on the "Applications Menu" button in the top right hand corner and go down to the "NeuroDebian" menu entry. Here you will find all of the particular applications specifically selected for neuroscience. They are broken down into categories for electrophysiology, medical imaging, psychophysics and a section of support links to access the relevant mailing lists. There is also an entry to re-run the setup wizard for the virtual machine.

Now that you have Neurodebian installed and set up, let's take a quick look at some of the tools provided. The core reason for the creation of Neurodebian was to deploy PyMVPA, so why don't we start there. PyMVPA provides a set of tools to do multivariate pattern analysis on large data sets. This is very useful in neuroimaging. There are several processing steps that are usually involved in this type of workflow, such as data preparation, classification, feature selection and generalization testing. PyMVPA provides high-level abstraction of these processes. There is a tutorial available at the PyMVPA project web site that walks you through the core concepts and processes involved in using it. A full description of what you can do would require a whole article on it's own. But PyMVPA isn't the only software included. Going to the package list at the Neurodebian home page gives a full listing, broken down into the following categories: distributed computing, electrophysiology, magnetic resonance imaging, modeling of neural systems, neuroscience datasets, and psychphysics. An interesting piece of software is under the educational category - virtual-mri-nonfree. This package provides a virtual MRI scanner to simulates running an MRI. This way, you can learn about how scanner parameters affect your images. A very cool tool.

Software is not the only thing provided by the Neurodebian distribution. There is also a rather large set of data packages available, all in one location. These include items like brain atlases, fMRI data from face and object processing in the ventral temporal cortex, and an MRI-based brain atlas of the anatomy of a normal human brain. There are tutorials for PyMVPA and MRI analysis which require sample data sets. These are also available from Neurodebian. There is also a blog on the Neurodebian website where you can find articles on specific tools and help with particular techniques. 

If you do work in computational neuroscience, you could do worse than starting with Neurodebian. This distribution gives you a full set of tools to get you started. There are even further derivatives of Neurodebian, built to support classwork, or to have a specific subset of the tools available for well-defined workflows. Maybe other research communities might be tempted to do a similar project? If you have the ability, you should consider offering some of your skills back to the project in order to help it grow. Of course, this is true of all open source projects.

Images
neuro1.png - The main page for Neurodebian.
neuro2.png - You can get Neurodebian further down on the main page.
neuro3.png - The OVA file can be imported in Virtual Box to get a complete environment.

URLs
http://neuro.debian.net  -  Main site for the distribution
http://www.pymvpa.org  -  Project website for PyMVPA
http://www.frontiersin.org/Neuroinformatics/10.3389/fninf.2012.00022/full  -  A scientific paper describing Neurodebian
