What is Happening Above Your Head?



In the past, we have looked at various astronomy packages that help you to explore the universe of deep space. But, space starts a lot closer to home. It actually starts a few hundred miles above your head. There are lots of things in orbit right above you. This month, we will look at one of the tools available to help you track the satellites that are whizzing around the earth, gpredict. There should be a package available in most Linux distributions. In Debian based ones, you can install gpredict with
   sudo apt-get install gpredict
This is usually a version or two behind the latest, so if you want to have the latest options you can always download and build from source. Once you have it installed, you can start it with the command 'gpredict'. Once it opens up, you should see the main window, with a sample layout given by the module named 'amateur'. [gpredict1.php] In the rest of this article, we will look at all of the various layouts that are possible, and just how much information is available to you.

The core concept in gpredict is that of the module. Modules can be thought of as documents in a word processor. They are containers that can be used to hold a number of other layout objects that display satellite information in a number of different ways. When you first start gpredict up, you get the default 'amateur' module, which contains a map view, a polar view and a single satellite view. For some of these views, you may notice a small down-arrow in one of the top corners. Clicking this icon will give you an appropriate drop-down list of options. For example, clicking the down arrow in the map view gives you a list of items like detaching the module or configuring it. [gpredict2.png] The map view offers a map of the Earth, with a series of satellites and their footprints on the Earth. When you hover over one of the satellites, you will see an information box with the satellite's detailed location. The single satellite view provides even more detail about one specific satellite. You can select which satellite is being displayed by clicking on the down arrow in the view. The polar view provides an overhead look, located at the ground station. In the 'amateur' module, you get one groundstation called 'sample'. You can add more groundstations by clicking the down arrow and selecting configuration. [gpredict3.png] You can add another groundstation by clicking the plus sign. This will pop up a details window where you can enter a name and location data for your ground station. [gpredict4.png] For the location, you can either enter the latittude and longitude manually, or if you live in a major city, you can select it from a global list of locations. One other item you should have noticed when you had the configuration window open was that you could select which satellites were being displayed. This list is rather large, but there is nothing stopping you from adding all of them to your module. It might make the display a tad crowded, but it should still work. 

We should take a step back at this point and look at some other configuration options available. The first option to look at is the menu item 'Edit->Update TLE'. This option lets you update the Keplerian elements for the satellites. You can either update them from the network, or from a local file. The default configuration is set up to remind you when the TLE data is likely out of date. You can then go ahead and update this data. For an update over the network, the default configuration is to download NORAD data from www.celestrak.com. All of the other configuration options are available under the menu item 'Edit->Preferences'. [gpredict5.png] Here, you can change options like the number formats used or the geographical coordinates. There is also a tab for ground stations, where you can edit or add ground stations. The modules section lets you change configuration options used in the display of the gpredict modules. You can change things like the refresh rate for the displays or what map to use as the background for the map view. You can select what type of layout you want for this particular module. When you select a new layout, you will see a preview of what it will look like in the preferences window. There are 9 different pregenerated layouts available, or you can create a custom layout. When you select the custom layout, you define what it will look like by entering the layout code. The details of how to define a code to give the layout you want is detailed in the user manual.

The last part of gpredict is the ability to control radios and rotators. The key to this is the library hamlib. By using this library, gpredict can handle Doppler tuning of radios and tracking of atenna rotators. When you want to connect hardware to your computer, you should verify that hamlib can talk to it successfully. Once you have verified that everything is talking correctly, you can set up gpredict to talk to your hardware. This is handled in the interfaces section of the preferences window. There are two tabs, one for radios and one for rotators. Since hamlib communicates over network protocols, the radio or rotator doesn't even need to be connected to the same machine. You can define one of these pieces of hardware with a hostname, a port and the communication details. Once you have your hardware configured, you can control it by pulling up the radio control window. This is accessed by clicking the down arrow in the map view and selecting 'Radio Control'. [gpredict6.png] You can see the details of the downlink, uplink, as well as information about targets.

Now that you know how to get satellite information for what is moving above your head, you should be able to go outside and do some actual observations and see all of the man-made objects travelling around. It can be inspiring to see how much we already do in space, and how much more we could be doing.


IMAGES
gpredict1.png - When gpredict is first started up, you get an initial module called 'amateur'.
gpredict2.png - Some views have drop-down lists of options that you can play with.
gpredict3.png - You can set the configuration details for the map view here.
gpredict4.png - You can add a groundstation, with details here.
gpredict5.png - The preferences window lets you change all sorts of options.
gpredict6.png - You can control radios and antenna rotators that are defined in gpredict.



URL
http://gpredict.oz9aec.net/index.php  -  The main web site.
http://www.amsat.org/amsat-new/tools/keps_tutorial.php  -  A tutorial on the format for TLE data.
 
