Slicing Your Scientific Data


In many previous articles, we looked at several pieces of scientific software that either analyzes image information or actually generates image data for further analysis. This month, we will look at a tool that can be used in analyzing images generated as part of medical diagnosis work. In several diagnostic medical tests, complex three-dimensional images are generated that need to be visualized and analyzed. This is where this month's software, 3D Slicer, steps into the workflow. 3D Slicer is a very powerful tool for dissecting, analyzing and visualizing this type of complex three-dimensional imaging data. It is fully open source, and is available not only on Linux, but also on Windows and Mac OSX. It is also built as a core program with a plugin architecture. This means that you can add extra functionality to do completely new analysis. While 3D Slicer has been written to handle medical images, the development team has been very careful to say that the software has not been approved for clinical use and shouldn't be used for diagnostic work. It is intended to be a research tool, hence its open source license and plugin architecture. These aid in being able to work with newly created algorithms and develop the next generation of tools that will be incorporated into diagnostic software.

Installation involves downloading a file directly from the project web site. For Linux, this file is a gzipped tarball. You can select between a stable release or a nightly release. Once you download the tarball, you can unpack it with the command
   tar xvzf Slicer-4.6.2-linux.amd64.tar.gz
This will unpack everything into a subdirectory named 'Slicer-4.6.2-linux-amd64'. Of course, the '4.6.2' portion will be different if you have downloaded a different version. Once you have everything untarred, you can run it by using the command
   ./Slicer-4.6.2-linux-amd64/Slicer
When it starts up, you end up with an empty project. [3dslicer1.png] If you are trying to learn how to use 3D Slicer, you may not have any data to work with yet. Luckily, there is a button on the main window that allows you to download sample data. When you click on this button, you get a list of potential sample data sets that are available for download. For this article, we will click on the 'Download MRHead' button and use the related data set. [3dslicer2.png] Once it is downloaded, it automatically gets loaded and you can see the results in the 3 2-D slice viewing windows. There is still a fourth window that is used for 3-D rendering, however, that we still haven't used. In order to get an image rendered here, you will need to hover over the pin icon in the top left-hand corner of one of the 2-D panes. Once you do, a small popup window will appear where you can select a link icon to tell 3D Slicer to link all three slices together. You can then click on the eye icon beside the link icon to tell 3D Slicer to render the 3-D view of the image data. [3dslicer3.png] This rendered image can be manipulated with your mouse, allowing you to rotate it or to change the zoom level. There are also several built-in visualization options. These are available by clicking on the pin icon at the top left-hand corner of the 3D pane. This will popup a new window where you can manipulate the 3D image. [3dslicer4.png] This includes setting the zoom level, what labels are displayed, and even have the image automatically rotate.

Simply viewing the image data is not the only thing that you will likely want to do as the analysis of your data. This is where the plugin architecture of 3D Slicer really shines. There are over 100 modules available in 36 different categories. These are available from the dropdown box in the center of the top of the window. [3dslicer5.png] This is where a lot of the real work gets done. As an example, say you wanted to apply an island removal filter to your image. You can select this option within the modules dropdown list, which will add a new entry within the left-hand pane. This is where you can select the required options, such as the input and output volumes, and the minimum island size. [3dslicer6.png] You can then click on apply and let your computer run the process. What if the modules included with the default installation don't do what you need 3D Slicer to do? You can click on the menu item 'View->Extension Manager' to pop up a new management window. [3dslicer7.png] Installing a new module is as simple as clicking on the install button. Once you do, you may need to restart 3D Slicer before the new module is available for your use. You can uninstall any modules no longer needed by selecting the 'Manage Extensions' tab in the Extension Manager.

Because so much work has been put into managing and manipulating three dimensional image data, the capabilities of 3D Slicer have started to be used in other problem domains. As an example, there is a module named 'SlicerAstro' which can be used to handle astronomical image data. It includes a number of sample data sets that can be used in order to explore the functions available within SlicerAstro. Loading one of the sample data sets gives you an output that is very similar to that which we saw above. Selecting from the module dropdown list and clicking on the entry 'Astronomy->Welcome to SlicerAstro' will pop up new information within the left-hand pane. [3dslicer8.png] Here you can download more sample data, or get access to tutorials on how to use the SlicerAstro module. This is one example of how you may want to extend 3D Slicer into your own problem domain of three dimensional image analysis.

If you have complex imaging data that needs to be processed, hopefully this short introduction to 3D Slicer has given you a new option that you may not have encountered before. It is heavily used in research applications, and with the ability to write your own extensions, it should be able to handle almost any work that you may be interested in throwing at it. Just be aware that it has not been approved to do any diagnostic work. Also, there are a large number of tutorials available online, covering many different problem domains. A little bit of Google-Fu should get you examples that will help you get started on your problem solution.



IMAGES
3dslicer1.png  -  When you first start 3D Slicer up, you get a display of an empty project, ready for your work to start.
3dslicer2.png  -  There are several sample data sets available for you to learn with, such as this head MRI data.
3dslicer3.png  -  You can get a 3-D rendering of the imaging data for alternative analysis options.
3dslicer4.png  -  You can use several built-in functions to manipulate the 3D rendering of your imaging data.
3dslicer5.png  -  There is a rather large collection of modules available for data analysis.
3dslicer6.png  -  Activating the island removal module opens an options pane on the left-hand side.
3dslicer7.png  -  You can add and remove a large number of extra modules with the Extension Manager.
3dslicer8.png  -  You can get extra information for newly installed modules, such as AstroSlicer.



URLS
https://www.slicer.org  -  The main website for the 3D Slicer project.
