Astronomy for KDE

While we have looked at a large number of science applications, we haven't really looked at too many options available within the KDE desktop environment. This has been due to my own biases in using a GTK-based desktop environment. So, we will look at some of the packages available for the science people who really like to use KDE on their own machines. This month, we will start off with the astronomy program kstars. If you have the full environment installed, you should already have it available. If you don't, you should be able to install it. For example, you can install kstars on Debian-based distributions with the command
   sudo apt-get install kstars
If this is your first KDE-based application that you are installing, it will also need to pull in a rather large set of dependencies. This is just the price of using a new GUI toolkit. Of course, any other packages will be incrementally smaller since all of the shared dependencies will already be there.

To launch kstars, you can either click on a menu item in your desktop environment, or enter the command 'kstars' in a terminal window. The first time you start kstars up, you need to go through the setup wizard to configure elements like your location. [kstars1.png] Once kstars finishes starting up, you should get a display of the sky from the location you set during the setup. [kstars2.png] The display can be panned around by simply clicking and dragging the star field to see the location of interest. Which items are labelled depends on what zoom level you are on. There are two buttons at the top of the display to zoom in and out. Beside these is a third button, labelled 'Find Object', that you can click on to get a search window. This window can use filters to search for particular types of objects, like comets or asteroids, or you can search through all of the objects that kstars knows about. Once you find the object of interest, you can click on it and have the display slew around until the object is in the center of the display. If it is below the horizon, a warning box will pop up asking you if you still want to re-center the display or not. Once you have your object selected, you can right click on it to get a drop-down menu of things you can do with it. [kstars4.png] The header of this drop-down contains the full name of the object, along with rising and setting times. Below that, the first option is to center and track the object. This is useful because the default display mode is to have the display updated in real time. This way, you always have a view of what the sky looks like right now. You can select the details option to pull up even more information on the object. [kstars5.png] You can add a flag to make the object easier to keep track of, or even add tracks as the object moves across the field of view. You can even calculate the angular distance to another object, or plan out a star hopping path to some other object. For some objects, there may be images from the Deep Sky Survey available. If they are, there will be options on this drop-down menu labelled 'Show DSS Image' or 'Show SDSS Image'.

While kstars comes with quite a bit of data when you install it, this isn't everything that is available. You can add new data sources by clicking on the menu item "Data->Download New Data...". This will open up a new dialog window giving you a list of what data catalogues are available to download. [kstars3.png] For some of the data sets, like comet and asteroid information, there is a constant updating of the detailed information available to the astronomical community. You can download these updates by clicking on the menu item 'Data->Updates->' and selecting which catalogue to update. You can even import your own data by going to the configuration window and clicking the "Import Catalog..." button on the "Catalogs" section. Since we are in the configuration window, you can see that you can also change settings on how to view several different categories, such as solar system objects, satellites and supernovae. The guides section defines what extra information gets displayed, such as constellation lines, names and the Milky Way. The INDI (Instrument Neutral Distributed Interface) section controls how kstars talks to your connected telescope. You can optimize kstars to how you like to work with all of the options available. Like some other astronomy programs, kstars includes the ability to control telescopes. You can pull up the telescope wizard by clicking on the menu item 'Tools->Devices->Telescope Wizard...'. [kstars6.png] Once the connection is made, you can pull up the control panel and send instructions to your telescope. [kstars7.png] You can even automate your observations using this functionality. Clicking on the menu item 'Observation->Observation Planner...' will pop up a window where you define a complete set of observations that you want to run. If it is a bit confusing at first, there is a wizard available to help walk you through setting up a plan.

While you may have made your own observations, you may want to look at observations made by other researchers. The file format most often used is the FITS format (Flexible Image Transport System). Kstars includes a FITS viewer, which has a number of analysis tools. You can open a FITS file by clicking on the menu item 'File->Open FITS...'. [kstars8.png] There are several tools available to work with the data in the image. You can look at the basic statistics of the image, including the width, height, maximum, minimum and mean of the pixels. You can pull up a histogram, showing the frequency spread of the image data. The 'View' menu item includes several more tools where you can equalize the image, pass it through a high contrast filter or apply an auto stretch. There is even an entry to mark any stars that kstars can identify automatically.

You now have another astronomy program in your toolkit that you can use when your scientific research moves in that direction. In the following months, we will look at other scientific software packages within this desktop environment, and see just how much research can be done with KDE.



IMAGES
kstars1.png  -  When you first start kstars up, you need to go through the setup wizard.
kstars2.png  -  You get a display of the sky from your location when kstars starts up.
kstars3.png  -  There are several extra data sets that you can download and install.
kstars4.png  -  You can interact with the objects in the display.
kstars5.png  -  The detail window has lots of extra information available for most objects.
kstars6.png  -  You can add telescopes as device under the control of kstars.
kstars7.png  -  Once it is connected to your computer, you can use kstars to control your telescope.
kstars8.png  -  The FITS viewer lets you analyze and manipulate observational images.
