Open Source Space

As I right this, NASA has just passed another milestone in releasing their work into the open source community. A press release came out announcing the release on Thursday, April 10, of a new catalog of their software that is available as open source. This new catalog includes both older software that was previously available, along with new software being released for the first time. The kinds of items available include project management systems, design tools, data handling and image processing. In this article, we will take a quick look at some of the cool codes available.

The main website is located at http://technology.nasa.gov. [nasa_21.png] This main page is used as a central portal to access all of the technology available to be transferred to the public. This includes patents, as well as software. As a quick start, there is a subject cloud in the lower central region of the page that can do a search on several different keywords for you. Unfortunately, this is only a catalog of all of the offerings, and is not quite complete yet in terms of the detailed information. So, for example, if you click on "Command Control", you will be taken to a results page that includes items like "Rendezvous and Proximity Operations Program (RPOP)". [nasa_23.png] If you click on this, you will be taken to a details page that is essentially unpopulated. The assumption is that this will be filled in as time allows in the future. This does give you a list of what is available, though, which is half of the battle. Staying on the result list page, you should notice that there is the name of a NASA center on the right hand side of each line. This is the actual source for the given patent or software entry. Once you find something of interest, you can go to the individual center's web site to find more details about it. On the lower right section of the main page of the NASA technology site, you can find direct links to the technology sections for each of the individual centers. The amount of information available at each of these centers varies, but you should be able to find out more details. On some of the sites, you will have direct download links to get the software that you are interested in. In other cases, you will have the contact details for a person that you need to talk to in order to get copies of the software in question. There is also a PDF catalog available on the front page of the main technology site. Here, you can get a 172 page catalog of all of the available software, broken down into 15 categories, for offline access.

One issue that will become evident right away is that not everyone can access all of the available software. Some of the released software is only available to U.S. residents, or even more restricted access for only other parts of the U.S. government. So, is there an easier option for the international community? Off of the front page, there is a set of other useful NASA links on the lower left side. The one labeled "NASA Open Source Software" (http://code.nasa.gov) will take you to a sister site that will give you access to a more centralized repository of software released as open source. [nasa_22.png] It is laid out as a list of available code within a Wordpress blog, and looks like it is being updated regularly. So it is worth keeping an eye on this blog for future releases.

In all of this discussion, we haven't yet looked at what kind of software is available from the technology exchange at NASA. There is a rather broad collection to play with. The first one we will look at is the Mission Control Technologies (MCT). This package, hosted on github, provides a real-time monitoring and visualizing platform that was developed at Ames Research Center for use in spaceflight mission operations. It is based on configurable components, so you can use this to build your own application to monitor pretty much anything. [nasa_24.png] If you want to build your own spacecraft to monitor, you will need some way of controlling its flight. Enter the Core Flight Executive (cFE), a portable, platform independent embedded system framework developed at the Goddard Space Flight Center. It is used for flight software for satellite data systems and instruments, but you can use it for other embedded systems. It is built from subsystems including executive services, time services, event services, table services and a software bus. For Python programmers out there, you can download SunPy, a library to handle several tasks you run into when doing solar science. [nasa_25.png]

For many scientific applications, we need to use clusters of machines. NASA is no exception to this. To handle the complexities, there are several software packages available. For dealing with files, there are the Multi-Thread Multi-Node Utilities (Mutil). Mutil provides mcp and msum, which allow for parallelized access to files for moving around a cluster. If you have a cluster of machines available over SSH, you can use them with Mesh (Middleware Using Existing SSH Hosts). Mesh provides a lightweight grid middleware that can group your cluster hosts into execution units. You can then issue a command, and Mesh will handle going to one of the available hosts in your group and running this command. If you need an interactive session, there is Ballast (Balancing Load Access Systems). With Ballast, when you try and SSH into your cluster, you actually end up being shunted onto an available host within your cluster automatically.

The last package we will look at is mission analysis. There is the General Mission Analysis Tool (GMAT), which is designed to help you plan your next trip to Mars. [nasa_26.png] You can use GMAT to model, optimize and estimate spacecraft trajectories. You can create physical resources required for the trip, like the spacecraft, thruster, tank, ground station, etc., and model how the trip will play itself out. There are also analysis model resources, including differential correctors, propagators, and optimizers to define the details of the model. The user guide goes through the multitude of options available. There are also a series of tutorials, including simulating an orbit, doing simple orbit transfers or even planning an optimal lunar flyby using multiple shooting, that walk you through how to use GMAT in greater details.

Now that we've looked at a few of the newly released codes at NASA, hopefully you will have your interest piqued enough to go exploring through the more than 1000 other codes available there. You never know what you may find. If you find something really interesting, share with the rest of us.



Images
nasa_21.png - The main technology transfer site is a portal to provide access to everything that NASA has to offer.
nasa_22.png - Software released under open source is available at this blog.
nasa_23.png - The results page on a search will give you a list of software and patents that are available from NASA.
nasa_24.png - With the MCT, you can build your own application to monitor pretty much anything.
nasa_25.png - You can do all kinds of solar science with SunPy.
nasa_26.png - GMAT can help you plan out your next deep space mission, from the comfort of your own living room.


URLs
Main technology site - http://technology.nasa.gov
Open source site - http://code.nasa.gov
