Computer Aided Engineering in Linux

Engineers are some of the heaviest number crunchers around. If you are a grad student, post doc or undergrad, you usually get whatever is lying around as your work machine. Also, depending on how inflexible your local IT department is, you may be forced to use one or another of the commercial operating systems around these days. What is a lowly student to do when they have heavy computational work to do? You may be interested in looking at CAELinux (Computer Assisted Engineering). This project provides a Live CD that gives you all of the open source tools that you might need for your engineering work.  And since it is a Live CD, you can use it without touching the local drive of the machine you are using.

Like all Live CD's, you have all of the standard desktop tools that you should be used to for a Linux desktop. These include firefox for web browsing, evolution for email, OpenOffice for word processing and spreadsheets and presentations. Alomg with these applications you have dozens of others to help you out in all of your number crunching work. The most recent versions are based on Ubuntu, so it should be a fairly comfortable environment for most people. You do need to be aware, though, that you cannot use the usual software update mechanism in Ubuntu. Many of the packages in CAELinux are compiled from source and optimized, so you don't want them getting accidentally overwritten by any packages provided by Ubuntu.
[gui1.png] - Welcome to CAELinux
There is a really well written introduction to CAELinux available right on the desktop, called "Getting Started". You should start here if this is your first step into the world of CAELinux.
[gui2.png] - Getting Started

Last month we looked at openFOAM. CAELinux includes a full install of openFOAM. It also includes another fluid dynamics program called salome. This program provides a full graphical interface which takes you from formation of your problem, to modeling, to calculation, through to analysis of your results. This might be a good choice for those who are more comfortable with a GUI. There are a series of examples on the desktop that are available. They provide a walkthrough of the program, showing you each of the steps as you go through.
[gui3.png] - CAELinux Tutorials
As you can see, there are tutorials walking through several common simulations, like modeling flow through a pipe. These can provide great starting points for many people.

If your work tends more toward data analysis, several popular packages are available. For all of you Matlab addicts, you have scilab available. Scilab provides the same types of functions, in an environment familiar to Matlab users. There is also maxima, which provides tools more from a mathematical background (i.e., analyzing functions, doing calculus), as compared to scilab's approach of working from a matrix background (i.e., looking at data analysis). Maxima has several front-ends available. The default one in CAELinux is wxMaxima. If you are doing really heavy statistical analysis, you have R. The real power of R is the CRAN repository, and you have a fair amount available out of the box. R also has several graphical front-ends available. CAELinux provides two, R Commander and RKWard. If you are doing work more along the lines of pure mathematical analysis, you also have octave available. The default GUI available within CAELinux is QtOctave. In all of the above cases, you also have the text based interfaces available, if you are an old style computer user who prefers that kind of thing.

There are lots of software packages available for applications other than CFD or statistics. If you need to do finite element analysis, there's elmer. It provides both a text based and a GUI interface. There is JavaFoil, available to do analysis on airfoils and wings. If you are designing electrical circuits, there are two packages available. Electric is a CAD program helping you to layout your circuit. Once it is all laid out, you can use PCB Designer to get it setup so that you can etch a board to make it real.

This is all fine and good if you can use a standard toolset in your work. But what if you have really cutting edge research you need computing power for? CAELinux provides the entire GNU toolset. This means you have everything you need to go ahead and start developing your own code. All of the most common scientific and engineering libraries, like gsl and LAPACK, are available. If you are working on really large problems, you also have MPI and openMP available. This way you can develop a parallel programming solution, if that is what your problem needs.

Once you have all of your calculations done, an important part of data analysis is graphical analysis. There is something visceral and instinctive about actually seeing your data represented. To this end, CAELinux provides several packages which you can use to do this. If you simply want to plot your data, you have programs like grace and LabPlot. If you want to do more complicated data analysis, you have programs like G3Data and OpenDX Data Explorer. These programs have lots of functionality that can be used to graphically look at your data. If you are doing CFD work, there are several programs for visualizing your meshes. So you can have your choice, based on what features you're looking for.

The last option to look at this month is using CAELinux in "the cloud". Cloud computing is one of those sexy terms that gets used a lot in marketing, but sometimes doesn't really give you anything useful. In this case, there really is something substantial being offered. CAELinux can now be run as an application under the Amazon Elastic Cloud Computing. You can now run, on demand, as many nodes as you like, with each having 8 cores and 64GB of RAM. For people who don't have the resources to run their own cluster, but need more than what a desktop can handle, this can be a very attractive option. It is definitely worth looking into as a possible option. You can find out more information about EC2 at http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/, and the CAELinux web site has a very good set of instructions to get you set up and running.

As you can see, CAELinux provides a lot of power and functionality for doing computational science. Since it is a LiveCD, you can run it on essentially any 64-bit machine without touching the hard drive. But, you also have the option of installing it on the machine if you are allowed to. Download an ISO and start playing with it and see just how much work you can do with it.

Links
http://www.caelinux.com
 

